Article Ball, Desmond(1993) 'Strategic Culture in the Asia-Pacific Region', Security Studies, 3: 1, 44 — 74 To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/09636419309347538 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09636419309347538 Strategic Choices in the Asia-Pacific Region Strategic Culture in the Asia-Pacific Region Desmond Ball The security architecture of the Asia-Pacific region is in the process of profound transformation, partly occasioned by the end of the cold war and partly due to the dynamic economic developments in East and Southeast Asia. As the region adapts to the new strategic circumstances and policymakers attempt to construct new, multilateral arrangements and structures for enhancing security cooperation, there is a need to confront cultural legacies which both constrain some possibilities and suggest more positive avenues for policy making.The purpose this article is to examine the notion of strategic culture and its implications for security developments (including, especially, those concerning the prospects for greater security cooperation) in the Asia-Pacific region. The article delineates the principal purported elements of strategic culture in the region, and assesses the extents to which they have any real substance, widespread application, or significant impact on emerging processes of security cooperation and confidence building in the region. The analysis suggests that cultural factors will be less important than economic, technological and strategic developments in determining the new architecture of regional security. On the other hand, it also suggests that progress with the construction of new modalities for security cooperation will be slow and painstaking, that informal, pragmatic and evolutionary arrangements will have much better prospects than more formal structures and institutions, and that greater regional dialogue on security-related matters is an essential precondition of any more ambitious constructs. Sensitivity to Asian cultural dispositions will be necessary for Western participants in this dialogue. STRATEGIC CULTURE The concept of strategic culture holds that different countries and regions approach the key issues of war, peace and strategy from perspectives which are both quite distinctive and deeply rooted, reflecting their different geostrategic situations, resources, history, military experience and political beliefs. These factors profoundly influence how a country perceives, protects and promotes its interests and values with respect to the threat or use of force. The concept was developed by several strategic thinkers in the late 1970s, in the first instance to argue that the Soviet Union approached questions of nuclear strategy very differently from the United States (and, in particular, that the Soviet approach eschewed any possibility of fighting a limited or controlled nuclear war), but then more generally to explain the profound differences which exist in the ways different countries adapt to their security environments and attempt to solve their security problems - from the basic goals of diplomacy, through their sensitivity to various forms of external danger, their respective force postures (in terms of both levels of capabilities and the relative emphases accorded offensive or defensive strategies), and their characteristic civil-military relations, to the "styles" or "proclivities" displayed by their armed forces in peace and war. Most importantly, the concept of strategic culture was intended to break strategic theory out of the "black box" of ethnocentrism, to provide a conceptual means of avoiding misperception in international relations, and to improve the ability of national security establishments to communicate with or otherwise deal with others with respect to fundamental issues of peace and war. Unfortunately, however, the literature on strategic culture pertains almost entirely to U.S. and Soviet/Russian cultures, with some scant discussion of cases in Western Europe and the Middle East. Apart from some valuable work on Chinese and Vietnamese "ways in warfare," there has been no exploration of the relevance or utility of the concept of strategic culture in the Asia-Pacific region. This stands in marked contrast to work on "political culture" and "economic culture," in which the Asia-Pacific region figures very prominently. The concept of political culture refers to "that complex of attitudes and practices which ... reflects both the historical evolution of [a] society and the psychological reactions to social change of the society's political actors." This culture is "shaped by a blend of universal historical factors, particular national histories, and individual psychological traits, themselves affected by family socialization patterns." It determines, to an "unquestionably significant" yet undetermined degree not just "the aspirations and fears, the preferences and prejudices, the priorities and expectations of a people as they confront the challenges of social and political change," but also their attitudes to the concepts of authority and legitimacy and, indeed, the concept of power itself. In the work of Lucian Pye, the concept of political culture is extended from particular country case studies to embrace Asian politics as a whole. Although Pye acknowledges at the outset that "on the face of it, the mere idea of treating Asia as a single entity is absurd," he nonetheless contends that despite their great historical, ethnic and religious diversity, Asian societies do in fact share orientations toward authority that differ importantly from those held in the West (and in Africa and Latin America as well). Whereas in the West, power is viewed largely in terms of decision making - the ability to set agendas and mobilize resources to achieve specified goals - power in Asian societies tends to be identified with social status and oriented toward securing such values as deference, dignity, pride, and respect. Indeed, in most of Asia, the possession of power has traditionally been viewed as a way of avoiding "the chore of decision-making security lies in having no choices to make." Similarly, though more recently, attempts have been made to identify the role of cultural factors in the economic success of East and Southeast Asian societies. Peter Berger and Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao, for example, have argued that such features of Confucian culture as "work ethics, thrift, diligence, respect for educational achievement, avoidance of overt conflict in social relations, loyalty to hierarchy and authority, [and] stress on order and harmony" have probably been an important variable in the economic dynamism of East Asia. Again, the importance of this work derives not just from the appreciation that cultural predispositions have significant economic implications, but also from the argument that at least major elements of these cultural predispositions comprise a common variable throughout the region. There have been no similar attempts to articulate the nature and constituent elements of an Asia-Pacific strategic culture. There may not, in fact, be any such culture prevailing throughout this vast and disparate region. Rather, there are some important cultural and traditional factors which are common to Asian societies but which obtain to different extents and in different fashion in different countries and which have different implications for cooperative approaches to security in the region. Some of these factors rest their status more on myth than practical respect. None are absolute. And none are immutable. The principal (purported) elements of the Asia-Pacific strategic culture include longer time horizons and policy perspectives than those which characterise Western thinking and planning; reliance on bilateral rather than multilateral approaches to conflict resolution and security planning; an Asian way of war which places less emphasis on the holding of territory, and greater emphasis on the exercise of other forms of military, economic and cultural hegemony; commitment to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries; styles of policy making which feature informality of structures and modalities, form and process as much as substance and outcome, consensus rather than majority rule, and pragmatism rather than idealism; multidimensional or comprehensive approaches to security; and roles for the military that go beyond national defense to include politics, economic development and social affairs.Long-term PerspectivesAsians tend to think in longer time frames than Westerners. The old Malay saying of "lama-lama menjadi bukit," or "it takes a long time to build a mountain," has analogous renditions throughout East and Southeast Asia. As Sukarno once stated, "We, the Indonesian people, have learned not to think in centimeters or meters, not in hours or days. We have learned to think in continents and decades." Policymakers are generally not constrained by the three- or four-year election cycles which bedevil long-term planning in many Western states. But the attitude is much more fundamental than the product of different electoral systems. In part, it derives from a value system which places family or community interests ahead of the immediate satisfaction of individual material wants. Even more fundamentally, it derives from cultural perspectives which go back several thousand years - and in which periods of a few years or even decades lose significance. Mao Zedong once remarked wryly, "In real life, we cannot ask for 'ever victorious' generals." Rather, there will be inevitable reversals which can be philosophically accepted in light of longer-term objectives. As K'ung Teh-cheng, Taiwan's leading Confucian scholar, has stated (with reference to the maintenance of the communist regime in China): "35 or 40 years to a nation with a history of 5,000 years is nothing. It is a second on the clock. K'ung [Confucius] has been tested for 2,500 years and he is strong. Communism has been here for 40 years and it cannot survive." In other words, the security issues which are likely to be of most concern to regional leaders are those which have the potential to disrupt broader, longer-term objectives such as political stability and social harmony rather than more particular or immediate issues which are the day-to-day fare of Western security planners. Mechanisms for addressing these longer-term issues are more important than new institutional arrangements or quick fixes for dealing with less abiding issues. Asian Conceptions of War and StrategyWar, as Ken Booth has argued most cogently, is "a cultural phenomenon" (if not a "cultural disease"). Its purposes and modalities - that is, the strategies for the conduct of war - are strongly affected by social and cultural factors, roles for the military that go beyond national defense to include politics, economic development, and social affairs. In general, Asian conceptions of war and strategy are broader and more profound than Western conceptions in several important respects. To begin with, Western concepts of war are "rooted in the European nation-state idea," whereas some of the fundamental aspects of Asian concepts pre-dated nation building in Asia and remain attuned to sub-state and supra-state forces, and especially revolutionary forces, as much as states. Second, Western concepts tend to be more instrumental, concentrating more on techniques rather than the basic causes and dynamics of conflict. Third, Western concepts of war employ a narrow definition of war, excluding not merely a multitude of lesser conflicts such as "domestic" and "communal" conflicts but also the violence perpetrated on local populations, often to the detriment of broader strategic objectives. Fourth, the concepts of "strategy" and "tactics" are operationally defined at higher levels than the respective Western notions, with strategy being concerned with the broad capabilities and methods of maneuvering the enemy, actual or potential, into a position of being unable to counter foreign policy offensives, while tactics concerns the actual way an enemy is attacked after he is placed in such a disadvantageous position. (In other words, Asian concepts of strategy pertain more to what Western strategic thinkers term "grand strategy" and tactics more to "military strategy" rather than the particular means of battlefield operations.) As Sun Tzu wrote around 400 BCE, the supreme art of war is "to subdue the enemy without fighting." Strategy is concerned with the pursuit of national objectives and interests rather than the means of achieving victory on the battlefield. Hence, fifth, the military aspects of strategy (such as relative numerical strengths and weapons systems) are less important than political factors such as unity and stability on the home front and such intangibles as morale and mental skills. Attacking the mind of the enemy is far more important than the mechanics of physical clashes. As Sun Tzu wrote, "weapons are ominous tools to be used only when there is no alternative." Sixth, the object of military action is not the holding or taking of territory, the annihilation of the enemy's army, the destruction of his cities or the wastage of his countryside. As Sun Tzu wrote, "Do not put a premium on killing.... To capture the enemy's army is better than to destroy it... The worst policy is to attack cities. Attack cities only when there is no alternative." And as Mao Zedong wrote in 1947, "do not make holding or seizing a city or place our main objective." Seventh, the concepts of offense and defense are both fungible and complementary rather than alternative strategies. Mao Zedong paraphrased Sun Tzu as follows: Attack may be changed into defense and defense into attack; advance may be turned into retreat and retreat into advance; containing forces may be turned into assault forces, and assault forces into containing forces." In sum, the essential features of successful strategy are flexible plans, the ability to adapt to existing situations, and intellectual pliancy in pursuit of national or "grand" strategic objectives. Bilateralism as Opposed to Multilateralism Unlike the case in Europe, there is little tradition in Asia of multilateral approaches to security planning and conflict resolution. There was no comparable institutional development to the bloc structures of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) or the Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO) that dominated the security architecture of Europe during the cold war. Rather, the states in the Asia-Pacific region generally chose either to pursue policies of national self-reliance (based upon the strategy of People's War in China and Vietnam, and the concept of Tannas or "national resilience" in Indonesia) or to forge close bilateral relations with one or other of the superpowers - most often the United States, as exemplified in the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty (signed in September 1951), the U.S.-Republic of Korea Mutual Defense Treaty (January 1954), and the Mutual Defense Treaty with the Philippines (30 August 1951). The United States itself remains committed to bilateral structures, although since late 1991 its opposition to multilateralism has been somewhat less intransigent. In November 1990, for example, in a confidential letter to the Australian minister for foreign affairs and trade, Gareth Evans, the U.S. Secretary of State, James Baker, bluntly criticized the notion of a regional security dialogue and argued that "The current network of bilateral arrangements and agreements has served both of us - and the region - extremely well, and we should think long and hard before casting aside a proven success." In November 1991 Secretary Baker reiterated that the "loose network of bilateral alliances with the United States at its core" - or, more abstractly, a "balancing wheel" with spokes radiating from Washington to connections in Tokyo, Seoul, Bangkok, Canberra, etc.- had served as the key to stability and economic dynamism in East Asia for the past four decades; however, he recognized that "multilateral approaches to security are slowly emerging" in the region and acknowledged that "we should be attentive to the possibilities for such multilateral action without locking ourselves in to an overly structured approach." This is not to say that the modalities and practices of multilateralism have been totally absent from the Asia-Pacific region, but the limited experience with multilateralism has not been reassuring. The most ambitious attempt at establishing a multilateral or collective security arrangement was the Southeast Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), established by the Manila Conference in September 1954. SEATO was created as part of the same strategy that gave birth to NATO in 1949, but the logic of this strategy did not fit local conditions in Southeast Asia, where interests were quite divergent and subversion rather than direct communist frontal assault was the main threat, and the effort was ultimately doomed to failure." ANZUS, a trilateral alliance involving Australia, New Zealand, and the United States, formed in September 1951, represents a special case of cooperation among the white, Anglo-Saxon countries of the Pacific; in fact, the key relationships in ANZUS were mostly bilateral (Washington-Canberra and Canberra-Wellington), as confirmed by the suspension of the Washington-Wellington security connection in 1986. The Five Power Defense Arrangements (FPDA), established in April 1971, involve Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, and Singapore; although security cooperation under FPDA has been rejuvenated in recent years, it is based on the unique historical legacy of Commonwealth involvement in Southeast Asia and remains more a framework for consultation and limited cooperation rather than for collective security." Through the 1980s the RIMPAC series of maritime exercises in the mid-Pacific have become larger and more multinational, involving maritime forces from the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan, and South Korea. There are other, more limited forms of multilateral security cooperation emerging in the region. In the South Pacific, where security is defined in terms of economic, environmental and offshore resource control considerations much more than in military terms, the establishment of a Regional Maritime Surveillance Communications Network is now underway. Officially described as "a major milestone in the construction of regional surveillance capability," the network represents the first defense agreement that brings together Australia and all of the South Pacific island countries." In the case of ASEAN, which includes some countries where wariness of multilateral security arrangements has been the strongest in the region, there has now been official acceptance of the utility of institutionalized dialogue on security issues through the ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference (PMC) process. Arrangements have also now been initiated to institutionalize a regular dialogue on security issues involving senior military and defense civilians from throughout the region, as proposed by the Malaysian minister of defense, Datuk Seri Mohammad Najib Tun Razak, in April 1992. In addition to mechanisms for institutionalizing dialogue and consultation, multilateral endeavors are underway in other defense areas. For example, the national defense manufacturer associations of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines decided in 1990 to establish a regional grouping to promote complementary activities. A starting point for this process is the preparation of assessments of national defense capabilities, including the identification of particular deficiencies and proposals for advancing their common interests. Given that the principal defense manufacturers in the national associations that have formed the regional grouping are either government-owned or subject to strong government influence, it is fair to observe that the new arrangement "represents the introduction by proxy of a multilateral defense component within ASEAN." Another example of multilateral defense cooperation within ASEAN is the construction in Singapore of a C-130 flight training centre, equipped with a C-130 flight simulator, to provide training for C-130 flight crews for the defense forces of Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Taiwan. The fact that three ASEAN countries have acquired F-16 fighter aircraft (with the Philippines also intending to acquire some) provides a further basis for cooperation. For example, the Thai, Indonesian, and Singaporean air forces agreed in principle in February 1990 to establish a joint training base, with F-16 flight simulators, for their F-16 fighter pilots. The various ASEAN countries have also been prepared to cooperate multilaterally in addressing particular security issues of common concern. In early 1992, for example, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia agreed to cooperative efforts to combat the increasing threat of piracy in the Strait of Malacca and the Phillip Channel southwest of Singapore. The navies and police forces of the three countries have now begun to compile and share information on the areas where piracy is most rampant, to establish communications links between them to coordinate patrols against pirates, to organize joint sweeps against pirate strongholds, and to consider the establishment of joint police teams to be deployed aboard ships likely to be targets of pirate attacks. An anti-piracy center is being established in Kuala Lumpur to compile information on pirate activities for the use of both shipowners and police forces in the region. These are all modest steps, particularly when viewed against the magnitude of the major security issues confronting the region and the potential of multilateralism for enhancing regional security. It suggests that progress with multilateralism is likely to be slow and painstaking. Conceptions of International Law and the Principle of Non-interference in the Internal Affairs of Other Countries Although the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of any state has been promulgated as a fundamental principle of international law, it is not an absolute principle; rather, it stands uncomfortably and to a degree incompatibly with other so-called universal principles, and in particular the rights of self-determination for ethnic and racial minorities, and the principle of humanitarian intervention in situations where human rights are being grievously violated." Within international law itself, the relative weights accorded the competing principles of non-intervention, self-determination and humanitarian intervention are currently in a state of significant evolution - partly as a consequence of the end of the cold war, with governments now less inclined to ignore violations of human rights for the sake of paramount security considerations, and partly because of the increasing saliency of global community values, including human rights, economic interests and environmental concerns. "Although non-intervention was initially a Western concept (only three of the original forty-seven signatories to the UN Charter were from Asia - China, India, and the Philippines), it is now argued more strenuously by non-European countries, with Europeans tending to accord it relatively less weight. There are many reasons for the continued, essentially unqualified commitment to the principle of non-intervention in the Asia-Pacific region. To begin with, there remains a compelling body of international law, accepted by most official actors throughout the international state system, in which the principle of non-intervention retains primacy over those of self-determination and humanitarian intervention. Insofar as there has been something of a resurgence of the notion of humanitarian intervention among some, primarily Western, governments and international lawyers, the commitment to non-intervention has been compromised only in degree from the less qualified commitment in the Asia-Pacific region. It would be misleading to make too much out of the different extents to which different regional cultures accord primacy to the various competing and evolving principles of international law. Nevertheless, there are several significant features of recent and contemporary Asian history which strongly suggest that Asian states will be less inclined than Western ones to relax their veneration of non-intervention. Through much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the Asia-Pacific region was subject to constant and endemic intervention by Western imperial powers - from the Dutch colonization of Indonesia (which began in the seventeenth century and continued with brief interruptions in 1806-15 and 1942-45 until 1949); through the conquest of Burma by Britain in 1824-85; the forceful "opening" of China to the West through the Opium wars (1840-42 and 1856-60) and the defeat of the Boxer uprising in 1900-1901; the conquest and annexation of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos by France in 1858-83; the intervention of Britain in Malaya in 1874 and subsequent British colonization of Malaya (completed in 1914); the annexation of the Philippines by the United States in 1899-1901; to the U.S. intervention in Indochina in the 1960s and early 1970s. It is not surprising, then, as Hedley Bull has noted, that these countries "cling to the rhetoric of sovereignty as one of the means available to them of defending it."In Southeast Asia, the principle of non-intervention serves other more positive functions. Insofar as ASEAN has developed into a 'security community', it is principally because its members have come to accept rules of conduct by which they agree to refrain from interfering in each other's internal affairs and to settle their disagreements peacefully and without outside interference. Article 2(c) of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, signed in February 1976, states that "non-interference in the internal affairs of one another" is a "fundamental principle" guiding the relations of the contracting parties. For many of the ASEAN countries, as with many of the other states in the region, the primary security concerns, at least until fairly recently, have been associated with the tasks of nation building. Overcoming threats to governmental legitimacy, whether by armed communist insurgents or ethnic minorities, sometimes supported by external powers, has been the principal security challenge. In the process of nation building, the principle of non-interference becomes a very positive instrument, while concerns for ethnic self-determination and particular notions of human rights (such as those which concern civil or political rights rather than rights to sustenance and economic development) are not merely disruptive but can even cripple the process. On the other hand, it is sometimes too easy to invoke the principle of non-interference to forestall or deflect criticisms of governmental abuses or for other political purposes. China, for example, denounced the U.S. decision in September 1992 to sell 150 F-16 fighter aircraft to Taiwan on the grounds that Taiwan is "a province temporarily separated from the country" and that to sell sophisticated weapons to that "province" infringed China's sovereignty and amounted to gross interference in China's internal affairs. According to an editorial in People's Daily, "the sale is a hegemonistic act of power politics and a direct infringement upon China's sovereignty." China also reacted angrily to the passage by the U.S. Senate in September 1992 of the U.S.-Hong Kong Policy Act, which sets out U.S. policy towards Hong Kong after the British colony reverts to Chinese rule in 1997, on the grounds that it also "constitutes an interference in China's internal affairs." In Indonesia, following the massacre in Dili in East Timor in November 1991, the chief of Indonesia's armed forces, General Try Sutrisno, stated that: "This is an internal affair, and there should be no meddling." - even though Indonesia's annexation of the former Portuguese colony in 1976 was a unilateral act which has not been recognized by the United Nations. In Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby has rejected proposals for self-determination for secessionist Bougainville and for external mediation or resolution of the conflict on the grounds that "the Bougainville issue is an internal affair for this country" and that "we won't take kindly to anyone who blatantly undermines our sovereignty as a nation." In the case of Burma, which has the worst human rights record in Southeast Asia, the ASEAN countries have long resisted attempts to pressure Rangoon towards reform on the grounds that "Rangoon's political record was an internal matter not to be interfered with by other nations." More generally, Malaysia and Indonesia have consistently denounced Western concerns about human rights in Southeast Asia on the grounds that they involve a peculiar interpretation of human rights and amount to interference with the "internal policies of others." The implications of the steadfast regional commitment to the principle of non-intervention for regional security cooperation are ambivalent. On the one hand, the principle has served as an important basic condition for cooperation among states with different political systems and values, as well as an important instrument for nation building, thus contributing to "national resilience" and in turn to "regional resilience." On the other hand, the reluctance of Asian states to acknowledge legitimate movements for ethnic self-determination or to become involved in situations of gross violations of human rights has contributed to regional instability. The Bougainville crisis has had a spill-over effect on the Solomon Islands, straining relations between Port Moresby and Honiara." In Burma, the brutal suppression of the pro-democracy movement, the military offensives against the Kachin, Karen, and other armed secessionist groups, and the repression of the Rohingya Muslims in Arakan has produced widespread spill-over effects, including armed clashes between Burmese and Thai forces on the Thai side of the border and some 300,000 Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh - to the point where ASEAN diplomats now regard Burma's internal affairs as "a threat to regional security." Informality In Western liberal democracies it is a fundamental tenet that government involves highly differentiated functional institutions (executives or cabinets, parliaments, and the judiciary), with specified terms of references and responsibilities, codified in some form of constitutional law. It is also recognized, however, that the formal structures and processes do not account for the whole picture. There are always, at the very least, some informal relationships and arrangements which impinge substantively on policy-making outcomes, not to mention the inevitable political and bureaucratic-political factors or the strength and character of particular personalities. In Asian politics these informal processes and arrangements are generally much more than supplementations to the formal structures. Most Asian countries have adopted state institutions modelled in varying degrees upon Western forms. However, it is generally the case that the formal structures are the vestments of the political system, with real power and legitimacy residing in processes, arrangements and personages which are sometimes quite unconnected to the formal lines of constituted authority. In China, for example, Deng Xiaoping "holds no office [and] is responsible to no institutions," but he is indisputably the "paramount leader." Politics in Japan approaches the Western model of constitutional democracy at least as much as anywhere else in Asia. Even here, however, as is stressed in the classic textbook on Japanese politics, the formal structure often serves as nothing more than a facade for decisions arrived at through the processes of "private" or informal government: It is perhaps belaboring the obvious to state that government consists of much more than the formal structure. The neat diagrams in textbooks showing the relation of one ministry to another and their relationship to other branches of the government tell us only part of the story. One finds everywhere a good deal of activity, essentially political in character, taking place outside of the confines of government proper. It is particularly important in the case of Japan to take note of private, or informal government, because formal institutions in the Japanese political context often serve as a facade, giving legal sanction to what has been already decided by informal and covert techniques. The significance of informal processes and arrangements in Asian politics is not merely a difference of degree from its pertinence in Western democratic systems. Rather, it derives from fundamental cultural traditions of decision making in which there is little habit of the rule of law, highly personalized notions of power and legitimacy, a stress on consensus (in appearance if not in reality), and a strong predilection to the resolution of differences in private rather than in public fora. These cultural underpinnings have direct and important implications for the development of institutions for regional cooperation, whether in the fields of politics, economics, or security. They were, for example, heeded explicitly in the deliberations which led to the establishment of ASEAN and account in no small measure for the subsequent success of that association. The recollections of Tan Sri Ghazali Shafie, former foreign minister of Malaysia and, together with General Ali Moertopo of Indonesia, one of the principal progenitors of ASEAN, are very illuminating: Gen. Ali Moertopo of Indonesia and I dug deeply into our common cultural heritage. We recommended that inter-state problems should not be aired openly no matter how small. We were recommending a special kind of relationship conscious of the fact that the modern state entities in the region were the product of colonial designs. In order that words did not become enshrined and ossified in written agreement, Moertopo and I strongly suggested that a regional organization should be established but it should not be a creature of formal treaty, rather a solemn declaration based on the spirit of togetherness .... We also suggested that for the organisation to have a chance of success, its political function should be of a low profile .... The purpose has been not to puff the diplomatic pimples in public to make them look like big boils. Without the blare and glare of publicity , the [ASEAN] foreign ministers [have been] able to examine difficult political issues with thoroughness and cool heads. Thus many sharp edges of conflicts were blunted and the first 25 years became a period of confidence building." Similarly , with respect to the development of greater regional economic cooperation, it is evident that the processes of informal dialogue and consultation - "getting to know each other" - have been much more fruitful than attempts to construct formal plans or institutional arrangements. As then Malaysian deputy prime minister, Mahathir bin Mohamad, argued at a conference on Asia-Pacific economic cooperation in Bali in January 1980: The first move towards a Pacific Community should not be a comprehensive economic plan or some clear-cut formula for cooperation but the tedious one of getting to know each other .... [This is] time consuming and frustrating especially to those with the materialistic values of the West. How much easier it would be if a blueprint and a time-frame is agreed upon and these are systematically implemented .... But the strangers who inhabit the Pacific Basin cannot come together merely because of the logic and material benefits of an economic plan. Man cannot live by bread alone. He needs more than that . He needs friendship, the company of people he knows and whom he likes . Tak KenaI Maka Tak Cinta [or, roughly , we need to know one another before we can like each other ]. As a report on that conference noted, this approach "is foreign to Westerners who are intent on setting up organizations, deciding modalities and delineating responsibilities." In the case of proposals for regional security cooperation, there exists in the region both an attitude of discomfort towards any formal institutional arrangements and an appreciation that, whatever the merits of such arrangements, they will only be viable if preceded by a lengthy period of informal and unstructured dialogue. In Northeast Asia, where mechanisms for dialogue and consultation on regional security matters are perhaps most necessary but where the practice of dialogue is almost entirely absent, formal arrangements are simply unacceptable to China and North Korea (and even South Korea, although there are some refreshing indications that the intransigence in Seoul may be becoming less absolute). In Southeast Asia, where institutionalized dialogue and consultation has become much more acceptable, there are concerns that formalized multilateral security arrangements could prove to be counter-productive, encouraging antagonism rather than promoting harmony. The longer-term perspectives on security issues which generally obtain throughout the region also means that there is less scope for the institution of formalized arrangements. As Leszek Buszynski concluded from his study of the failure of the SEA TO alliance, "the permanence of an alliance may be out of proportion to the relatively transient need which called the alliance into being." Thus, arguments for formal structures for regional security cooperation need to be sensitive not only to the cultural predispositions to informality but also to the pertinent time horizons of particular security concerns. Pragmatism Asian approaches to issues of public policy tend to be pragmatic rather than idealistic, ideological, metaphysical, emotional, or perfectionist. Success in the achievement of practical results is what matters. In his controversial book - a million-copy bestseller in Japan - Shintaro Ishihara argues that the pragmatism of the Japanese people is an important factor in Japan's success in the international economy as well as in Japan's emerging role as a major world power generally. Taiwan has officially adopted a flexible approach to foreign relations which it calls "pragmatic diplomacy." Lee Kuan Yew has been variously described as an "ultimate pragmatist" and a "dedicated pragmatist," who moved with "relentless pragmatism ... unburdened by ideology" to transform Singapore into "a highly productive, consumerist republic." Even Mahathir bin Mohamad, prime minister of Malaysia, has been described as ruling with "inimitable pragmatism," pursuing compromises between different interests and tailoring national policies "to fit the Malaysian scene." The most ideological regime in Asia has undoubtedly been that of the Communist Party in China, but even here the principles of Marxism-Leninism have been adapted to suit the conditions of an Asian peasant society and continually reinterpreted to accord with changing national and international circumstances. The collaboration of the Communist Party with the Kuomintang in 1924-27 and, more especially, in 1937-41, was more than a tactical ploy. It reflected the fact that the party was imbued with Chinese nationalism just as much as it was committed to Marxism-Leninism, and that in periods of national crisis the defense of China's national interests becomes the principal concern. The successive mammoth and contradictory "revolutions" which have wracked Chinese political, economic, and social affairs since 1949 - the Great Leap Forward, the Hundred Flowers campaign, the Cultural Revolution, and the post-Mao struggle between the radicals (the Gang of Four) and the "pragmatic" faction represented by Deng Xiaoping'"- were partly about leadership struggles but they also reflected the inconclusive interplay of ideology and pragmatism. Mao's thoughts on "contradictions,"when divested of jargon, were "little more than the advocacy of tactical flexibility and opportunism."China's rapprochement with the United States in 1971-72 was unabashedly pragmatic. The United States maintained military forces at various points along China's eastern periphery, aimed at containing China's influence, and in Vietnam the United States was waging war against one of China's allies and even bombing Chinese troop concentrations and supply routes along the China-Vietnam border. The United States was the world's richest capitalist country, and China one of the world's poorest communist states. The United States was the embodiment of the concepts of individual liberty, political pluralism and free enterprise, while China remained committed to the ideals of collectivism. The respective U.S. and Chinese leaderships were "committed opponents of each other's political philosophy." However, the two countries shared an apprehension about the Soviet Union. The strengthening of Soviet deployments along the Sino-Soviet border posed a direct threat to China's security, which could best be offset by engaging a countervailing U.S. interest. In addition, the Chinese leadership was interested in acquiring foreign technology necessary for China's economic modernization, which in turn also required normalization of relations with the leader of the capitalist camp. Through the 1980s, the focus of China's pragmatism was on economic matters. Internally, economic reform progressed to the point where market conditions now govern as much economic activity as government direction. Externally, China's participation in international economic relationships increased dramatically - its two-way trade grew by an average of about 15 percent per year from 1978 to 1990. China's five principal trading partners are the capitalist economies of Japan, Hong Kong, the United States, Germany, and Taiwan. Direct foreign investment in China, which was almost non-existent before the early 1970s, reached $u.s.6.6 billion in 1990, most of it coming from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the United States. China joined the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1980, the Asian Development Bank and the Pacific Economic Cooperation Conference (PECC) in 1986, and became a member of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) process at the APEC III meeting in Seoul in November 1991. China's accession to APEC evinced remarkable pragmatism - in sending a foreign minister to Seoul (and thus risking offense to its traditional ally, North Korea); in the diplomatic compromise which allowed Taiwan to simultaneously join as "Chinese Taipei" for APEC purposes; and in the general keenness with which it "sought membership in an outfit utterly dedicated to capitalism." Another example of significant pragmatism in the region concerns the decisions by Malaysia and Indonesia to allow us. forces to use their facilities for repairs and maintenance purposes. Malaysia initiated and has been the principal proponent of the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN) concept; Indonesia remains a leader of the non -aligned movement (NAM); both have been adamantly opposed to the presence of foreign military forces and bases in the region. On the other hand, both Malaysia and Indonesia share the general regional concern that a precipitate departure of u.s. forces from the region could create a "power vacuum" which "will deteriorate the stability of security in Southeast Asia." In February 1992 the Malaysian minister for defense, Datuk Seri Mohammad Najib Tun Razak, announced that Malaysia had agreed to the use of the Malaysian Naval Dockyard at Lumut, which will have to be expanded, for servicing u.s. navy vessels; and Indonesia announced the same month that it was willing to allow u.s. vessels access to the government-owned ship repair facilities at the PT Pal Surabaya shipyard when they have been suitably upgraded. This remarkable shift in Malaysian and Indonesian policy has been decidedly pragmatic. As the Malaysian defense minister has stated, "Malaysia does not believe in pacts or permanent bases for foreign countries. Ours is more on the practical aspects of defense cooperation with the United States and strictly on a commercial basis." Policy making by Consensus Although the principle and practice of policy making by consensus is fairly characteristic of political and social affairs throughout much of the Asia Pacific region, it was articulated most pointedly by President Sukarno in the late 1950s, who condemned liberal democracy as a Western import which allowed the coercion of minorities by mere majorities - "fifty-per-cent-plus-one." This was not the Indonesian way. Rather, Indonesia's traditional procedures - from the village assembly up to the highest advisory bodies were based on deliberation and the search for consensus, or musjawarah and mufakat. These procedures enabled all views to be considered, and "as long as a substantial minority remained unconvinced by a proposal deliberation would continue until ... a consensus was reached."Sukarno's ideas of deliberation and consensus were suffused with Javanese syncretistic philosophy ("all things are one"). However, it was based fundamentally on an appreciation that for states with significant political and cultural heterogeneity - a characteristic of the Asia-Pacific region as a whole - consensus is essential to national harmony and resilience. The procedures of consensus need not necessarily, however, be incompatible with the conventions of Western liberal democracy. In Japan, for example, where the structures and practices ofWestern democracy have been instituted to a larger extent than in any other Asian country, the real decisions are reached by consensus arrived at during "long informal discussions among those in positions of influence" - a process known in Japanese as nemawashi (literally 'root binding')." (On the other hand, a critical scholar of Japanese politics, Karel van Wolferen, has described "the much vaunted" notion of consensus as "a myth.... It is one of the most successful myths about Japan.' According to van Wolferen, nemawashi is nothing more than a process whereby those in charge are able to deprive those groups or individuals advocating change of any possibility of action.)"Multidimensional or Comprehensive Approaches to SecurityWestern strategic thinking tends overwhelmingly to define security in terms of military threats (assessed in terms of both the military capabilities and intentions of likely or potential adversaries), which are in turn addressed in terms of military forces and plans for the employment of these forces. In the Asia-Pacific region, on the other hand, security tends to be defined in much broader or more comprehensive terms. Non-military threats to security (including economic and environmental threats as well as challenges to national integrity and internal stability) are regarded as being at least as important as military threats; security planning involves the coordination of various aspects of national policy, including economic and diplomatic aspects as much as military capabilities and plans, into a more comprehensive or multidimensional posture for protecting and enhancing national security. The concept of "comprehensive security" was first officially articulated as the basis of national security planning by the Japanese government in the late 1970s. As the Japan Defense Agency has reported: Efforts in non-military as well as military terms have generally become very important to ensure national security today. Promotion of diplomacy for peaceful purposes and measures to ensure the supply of energy and food are all indispensable for the existence of a country. In order to achieve national security, it is necessary to incorporate every measure, both military and non-military in a comprehensive and coordinated way. To give effect to the concept of comprehensive security, in December 1980 the Japanese government established a Council of Ministers Concerned with Comprehensive Security within the Cabinet "for the purposes of holding consultations on economic, diplomatic and other measures requiring comprehensiveness and coherence from the standpoint of national security. Indonesia's concept of security is also comprehensive and multidimensional. As General A. Hasnan Habib has noted: Different from the old conventional concept that equated security with a nation's capability to defend its territory against external threats, Indonesia's experience since independence has shown that the term "security" denotes and connotes all aspects of national life, that is, ideology, politics, the economy, society, culture and the military. Underlying this complex and multidimensional approach to security is the concept of Ketahanan Nasional (Tannas, or 'national resilience'), which "denotes both the security and prosperity condition of the national community and depicts the nation's capability to deal with, and overcome, any internal or external situation which threatens its security and prosperity, or aspects of its ideological, religious, political, economic, socio-cultural, and military life." Directly related to Tannas is the concept of Wawasan Nusantara ('archipelagic outlook'), which expresses both the geographic unity of the nation and the notion that Indonesia constitutes "a single and unified political, social, cultural, economic and defense and security entity." Based on Tannas and Wawasan Nusantara, the military aspect of Indonesian security is organized into the system of hankamrata ('total people's defense'), in which both the Indonesian Armed Forces (ABRI) and the civilian population at large form a self-reliant defense, employing various means of both conventional and non-conventional warfare, against threats to Indonesia's national integrity. Singapore's approach to defense and security is "encapsulated in the concept of Total Security," which "comprises Total Defense plus Diplomacy plus Internal Stability." Total Defense, in turn, has five elements: psychological defense, or the development of a collective will to defend and protect the country; social defense, which is the determination of Singaporeans, regardless of their race, language or religion, to "stay as one people through thick and thin"; economic defense, which connotes the ability to resist economic threats (such as boycotts, sanctions or sabotage); civil defense, or the organized capacity to safeguard civilian lives and limit damage during emergencies; and military defense, which is "the ability of the SAF [Singapore Armed Forces] to provide credible military deterrence against threats to our country's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to secure a swift and decisive victory over the aggressors should deterrence and diplomacy fail. In the late 1980s Australian security policymakers also came to appreciate "the reality that Australia's interests are multidimensional, and that to promote these interests we need policies that are equally multidimensional." In December 1989 the minister for foreign affairs and trade issued a major statement on Australia's Regional Security, which officially articulated a multidimensional approach to Australian security policy and planning: The policy responses or instruments available to protect Australia's security are multidimensional. They go well beyond strictly military capabilities, essential though these are. They also embrace traditional diplomacy, politico-military capabilities (in the border-zone between defense and diplomacy), economic and trade relations, and development assistance. And they extend to immigration, education and training, cultural relations, information activities, and a number of other less obvious areas of government activity. Unfortunately, however, Australia is yet to establish the necessary policy-making machinery for coordinating and providing coherence to these various dimensions of national security.Closer Integration of the Military and Society Although the roles of the military in different Western nation-states have been far from uniform, in general the intervention of military establishments in domestic politics has become limited and their influence is felt mainly in the conduct of foreign affairs and defense policies. At least in model terms, the military in Western democracies is a professional body, dedicated to particular functions and exhibiting highly specialized characteristics. Service to society translates into obedience to civil authority. Not only does the military have little inclination or propensity to intervene in domestic politics, but the existence of strong political institutions with generally accepted legitimacy obviates the need for intervention. Civilian political elites exercise control over the military through a formal set of rules, which specify the functions of the military and the conditions under which the military may exercise its power. These relate to the defense of the state, and exclude the involvement of the military in domestic affairs. No such sharp or formal differentiation between military establishments and their respective civil polities and societies exists in most countries in East and Southeast Asia (exceptions being Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Singapore and Malaysia). Rather, there is generally a high degree of military involvement in domestic political, social and economic affairs, and sometimes even a close integration of the military, political and social structures, although there are significant differences in the forms of this involvement and in the extent of military-civil integration. In some states (such as Indonesia), there was no pre-colonial army to develop so-called "professional" traditions. In many states, military formations born in the struggle for national liberation have maintained extensive political involvements. In some states, the colonial heritage has resulted in relatively weak or illegitimate political and other institutional structures and authorities, providing the military with both the incentive and the necessary political and social conditions for active involvement in "non-military" affairs. Moreover, in those societies with long military traditions (such as China and Vietnam), those traditions actually emphasize a close inter-relationship between the military and society rather than prescribing formal differentiation. As Sun Tzu noted around 400 BC, the military tend to possess a high degree of administrative and directive competence which is readily applicable to other areas of public life. When not training or fighting, the military, should be involved in "agro-military" activities such as settlement of remote areas or cultivating the land, or engaged in laboring on other public projects. The close integration of the military into national polities and societies throughout much of East and Southeast Asia is manifested in various forms. Some countries are ruled by military regimes - such as Burma (Myanmar), where the State Law and Order Council (SLORC) maintains an unabashed military dictatorship. Other countries can be defined as "indirect military regimes, proper," in which the governments exercise their power "only in consequence of behind-the-scenes military muscle" (for example, North Korea); "intermittently indirect military regimes," where a powerful and self-confident military intervenes from time to time to change the leaders or the course of an avowedly civilian regime (for example, Thailand); or "military-supportive regimes," which are "indubitably civilian" but which rely on extensive military support for their survival (for example, China, South Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines). In some countries, the involvement of the military in political, economic and social affairs is legitimized by arguments and justifications which are just as explicit and as sophisticated as those concerning military "professionalism" and civil-military differentiation in Western democracies. This is particularly the case in the communist states where the regimes came to power through "People's War." In China, for example, the close inter-relationship between the military and the polity and society is derived from a history which can be traced back at least as far as the time of Sun Tzu (c. 400 BC), as tempered by the thought of Mao Zedong. The basic relationship between the military and civil organizations was articulated by Mao in November 1938: Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun. Our principle is that the [Communist] party commands the gun; the gun shall never be allowed to command the party. But it is also true that with the gun at our disposal we can really build up the party organizations. In the structure of the power apparatus, the military is kept firmly under party and hence political control, but it is also true that the Party could not maintain power without the active support of the military. "Professionalism" and civil-military differentiation were described by Mao as "purely military viewpoints" and "erroneous conceptions." According to Mao: The Red Army must not merely fight; besides fighting, it should also shoulder such important tasks as agitating among the masses, organizing them, arming them, and helping them to set up political power .... Apart from such objectives, fighting loses its meaning and the Red Army the reason for its existence. The military is required to "consolidate its relations with the masses" by engaging in such non-military activities as building roads and bridges, harvesting crops, operating small factories and state farms, reclaiming waste land, laboring with workers and peasants, and acting as adjudicators of political orthodoxy. In Indonesia the army has never regarded itself as being restricted to an exclusively military role, and for most of its history it has played a major political role. In the immediate post-independence period, it saw itself as essentially the "guardian" of the new state, but it soon asserted its right to participate continuously in political life. After the introduction of martial law in 1957, it expanded its involvement not only in politics but also in the broader fields of general administration and economic management. In 1965--66, the army developed the doctrine, which was codified as dwifungsi (or 'dual functions') during the New Order, according to which the army had not just the military role of defending the nation but also a "social - political" role which extended to activities in "the ideological, political, social, economic, cultural and religious fields." As an army seminar declared in August 1966: The army, which was born in the cauldron of the Revolution, has never been a dead instrument of the government concerned exclusively with security matters. The army, as a fighter for freedom, cannot remain neutral toward the course of state policy, the quality of the government, and the safety of the state based on Panca Sila [that is, the general principles of belief in one God, humanitarianism, national unity, representative and consultative government, and social justice]. The army does not have an exclusively military duty but is concerned with all fields of social life. Since the mid-1970s, President Suharto has progressively "civilianized" the government, and the direct involvement of the military in economic activities has also declined, at least in relative terms." However, the military still wields considerable power in Indonesian society. The Suharto regime may not be a military regime, but it is a "military-supportive regime" which remains dependent upon the military for the exercise of power. In some ways, the prevalence of states with high levels of undifferentiated military should make cooperation between them easier and more productive. Military establishments tend to share important values and attitudes. The military mind is generally conservative, realist, disciplined, unemotional, and pessimistic. The military generally view the state as the basic unit of political organization, stress the continuing nature of threats to the security of the state and the continuing likelihood of war, and favor the maintenance of strong and ready military forces. ' The military establishments in Asia are likely to have a high degree of shared perceptions with respect to the challenges and threats to security, as well as the opportunities, presented by the emerging regional security environment. Dialogue between them is greatly facilitated by these shared values, attitudes and perceptions. In practice it has also been strengthened by the frequent interaction of military leaders throughout much of the region , both through the myriad of bilateral military arrangements in the region but also through their frequent involvement in the highest level state contacts in the region. On the other hand, these same characteristics of military establishments can militate against the institution of new multilateral regional security arrangements. They induce caution and a profound scepticism regarding the soundness of security structures which rely on the cooperation of other parties. Military leaders need to be clearly persuaded that security initiatives are unequivocally in the national interest. This could well mean that the most acceptable CSBMS are those concerned with matters which military establishments regard as important, view as being in their interests, and with which they are most comfortable in addressing, rather than more radical proposals or measures which transcend the military dimension . The involvement of the military in political, economic and social affairs also means, however, that military attitudes and interests impact on those proposed CSBMS which concern non-military areas of security. In other words, the particular measures likely to be acceptable, at least in the short term, are those which build on existing military linkages - including strengthening and expanding cooperation in terms of intelligence exchanges, reciprocal visits of senior military personnel, joint training and exercise programs, and sharing of military doctrines and defense planning concepts. Mutual understanding, trust and confidence is likely to be en- hanced. But another outcome could well be to further entrench the positions of military establishments not only relative to the other actors involved in their respective national security establishments (such as the foreign ministries), but also with respect to shaping the future course of security cooperation in the region. A CSBM process which led to stronger bonds among regional military leaders, particularly if unmatched by comparable progress in the political, economic and cultural spheres, would not be an unmixed blessing for the region. CONSTRUCTING A NEW STRATEGIC-CULTURAL DISCOURSE This discussion has frequently involved some bold generalizations. In a region as diverse as the Asia-Pacific region, any articulation of common cultural themes necessarily involves gross generality; the best that can be hoped is that the generalizations are not so gross as to be meaningless. The diversity of Asia is extraordinary. The countries range in size from more than nine million square kilometres (China) to some 580 square kilometres (Singapore); in populations from more than a billion (China) to some 275,000 (Brunei); in GDP from more than $5.3 trillion (Japan) to about half a billion dollars (Laos); in defense capabilities from nuclear powers (China) to a few thousand armed personnel (Brunei); in political systems from liberal democracies to communist regimes and military dictatorships; and in culture and tradition from the Buddhist, Taoist, and Confucian societies of East Asia to the Muslim countries of archipelagic Southeast Asia. They differ greatly in terms of their national interests, threat perceptions, and even their definitions of national security and regional security. There are significant historical differences throughout the region. Some countries, such as China and Vietnam, have evolved "a distinctive military science" over hundreds of years. Other countries have exercised defense responsibility for only a few decades. The consequences of colonialism and dependence, which affected most countries in the region and which has inevitably colored their strategic cultures, is still in varying degrees of dissipation. The various postulated elements of Asia-Pacific strategic culture obviously obtain to different extents and in different fashion in different countries. The involvement of the military in domestic political, social, and economic affairs, for example, is obviously much greater in China, Thailand, and Indonesia than in Japan, Malaysia, and Singapore. There is little evidence of pragmatism in North Korea. "Consensus" in Japan may simply be "a myth." In practice, the various elements are not all honored to the same extent throughout the region. Some of the purported factors are not always fully compatible with all the other factors, so that breaches to the rule are inevitable. The breaches are sometimes more important and interesting than the rule. Pragmatism, in particular, frequently overrides some of the other elements. Bilateralism is far from sacrosanct. The ASEAN countries, for example, are willing to pursue multilateral approaches to certain problems such as piracy, if those approaches are more likely to succeed than bilateral measures. Even in the case of the principle of non-interference in domestic affairs, exceptions can be made in the interests of broader concerns. The ASEAN countries, for example, have made representations to Rangoon over the treatment of the Rohingya Muslims in Burma as their concern that the refugee problem is becoming a threat to regional stability has come to outweigh their commitment to non-interference in the affairs of neighboring countries. Moreover, even where a particular element has been fairly characteristic of most political activity in a given country, the exceptions are sometimes quite fundamental. In China, for example, as Lucian Pye has noted, even though pragmatic considerations have readily guided most spheres of life, "the overpowering obligation felt by Chinese rulers to preserve the unity of their civilization has permitted no compromises in Chinese cultural attitudes about power and authority." The various purported elements of Asian strategic culture also differ according to the extents to which they are fundamentally embedded in traditional political and social cultures or are more second-level derivations from the fundamental cultural conditions. The more fundamental cultural factors include respect for hierarchy and authority, avoidance of overt conflict in social relations, and the stress on order and harmony. Together with pragmatism and "plain old politics," these are often more important in determining attitudes and policies with respect to particular security issues than second-order elements of strategic culture. For example, the practice of consensual rather than majority decision making derives from the cultural predisposition to harmony, while the preference for bilateral rather than multilateral security relations derives from the pragmatic perspective that contentious issues are more likely to be resolved in more private two-party discussions than in more open multilateral fora. The relatively unqualified commitment to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of others, at the expense of the concept of humanitarian intervention, is partly due to the demands of nation-building, but it also derives from a value system which accords higher priority to community interests rather than individual rights. The longer-term perspectives which attend consideration of security issues also derive in significant part from this value system. Most importantly, the elements of strategic culture are not immutable. Jack Snyder, who introduced the term "strategic culture" to the strategic debate, has himself taken pains to warn that most works on the subject have tended to underrate prospects for fundamental changes in strategy in response to changes in the objective internal or external environment. In the same fashion, much of the work on political culture (including that of Lucian Pye) has tended to portray culture as a static force and to underrate the possibilities of real change. As adherents of the neoculturalist school havepointed out, however, culture is fluid; change does occur, albeit along lines set by the "available cultural repertoires." Or, in the words of Keith Baker: Political culture is a historical creation, subject to constant elaboration and development through the activities of the individuals and groups whose purposes it defines. As it sustains and gives meaning to political activity, so is it itself shaped and transformed in the course of that activity." As Peter Berger has noted, cultural traits can sometimes be changed as a result of deliberate interventions by government (especially through the institution of educational policies), but "they usually change spontaneously in response to new circumstances." The condition and character of security in the Asia-Pacific region is changing rapidly. Indeed, the pace and scope of change in the region produced by the economic dynamism, the withdrawal of the Soviet/Russian presence and the drawdown of u.s. capabilities, and the investment in defense modernization programs is not only unprecedented; it has become the single most important characteristic of the emerging regional security environment. This provides an unprecedented opportunity for innovation and creativity; indeed, the dynamism and fluidity of the region demand new constructs. In the words of neoculturalist James Watson, "culture in today's world has to be negotiated, transacted and achieved." The construction of new cultural discourses should be easier to achieve in the case of national security policies than most other areas of public policy because there is less need for negotiation and transaction among the populations at large; it is an exercise in which national foreign and defense policy elites have relatively greater autonomy and in which accommodation to domestic conditions is relatively less important than response to objective external developments. Moreover, insofar as cultural factors remain intransigent, the objective economic, technological, and environmental developments will surely prove overwhelming. Rather than immobilizing the prospects for innovation, cultural traditions should be regarded as providing the raw materials for new political constructions." 