Chapter 7: Discussion 
This chapter answers research hypothesis H1-H4 by examining - individually and then collectively - the factor-factor and factor-indicator relationships of SEM models, the composite scores derived from them, and insightful response patterns of survey questions. Overarching themes and notable relationships are highlighted but the deeper meaning and implications of these results are discussed in more detail in the next chapter. The results overall did not find respondents to have a Confucian worldview or to strongly endorse state behavior based upon the values of Confucian moral governance. Variation of responses were found to be fairly consistent when examined according to the assumptions of rational choice theory adjusted by the elements of strategic culture, especially if Chinese nationalist beliefs were added. Though observed preferences were also fairly consistent with a more permissive interpretation of Confucian views of war, the moral legitimacy of such claims was substantially weakened by the strong bias giving greater permissibility for the respondent’s own country than for others. There was also little evidence that Confucianism influenced normative strategic preferences – what could also be called moral ideals about the use of force – and there was even less evidence that morality, Confucian or otherwise, influenced or constrained actual strategic behavior. H2: Respondents do not hold a Confucian worldview of international relations and state behavior. The latent factor that measured respondents’ worldview, Views of IR, had n’s of 1482/1413 and moderate composite reliabilities of 43%/37%. Using a scale from 0 to 1.0 units, where stronger Confucian beliefs were lower scores,the means and medians for this scale of .49/.52 fell quite close to the middle of Confucian and political realist beliefs. Those asked about their own country had slightly more realist and substantially less variance in beliefs. The meaning of abstract factor composite scale scores can be more clearly understood by looking at the combination of answers that resulted in the three most popular scores. This better conveys why composite scores close to the middle of the scale actually show weaker Confucian views than might otherwise be expected. All three for each version are listed, in order from most popular to third most popular, in Table 10, below. The second most popular scores for each are closest to the composite scale mean and medians. The second most common score for Version 1, .437, correlated to respondents believing that a foreign state’s security was best pursued through international laws and institutions. Respondents also mildly agreed that it was in a foreign states best interests to cooperate and compromise with other states, that foreign states should pursue their best interests even at the detriment of other states, with Thucydides’ assessment that international relations is really about power politics, and that foreign policy should be based upon how the world really is. The second most popular score for Version 2, .532, indicated that state security required the respondent’s own country to possess superior absolute military might. There was also mild agreement that their state should cooperate and compromise, mildly disagreed that their state should pursue its interests at the detriment of other states, mildly agreed with Thucydides, and mildly agreed that foreign policy should be based upon how the world really is. Though the scaling means that scores fall close to the middle of a 0-1.0 scale, the patterns of responses actually show stronger endorsement of non-Confucian values and principles. Table 10 – Views of IR Scale Top 3 Reference Looking more carefully at individual questions, the majority of respondents of both survey versions mildly agreed that foreign policy should be created based upon how the world “actually is” rather than how it “should be” (38%/41%). However, the distribution of responses to this question was strongly biased according to state self-interest. Compared to those thinking about their own state, there was greater support for foreign states to pursue idealistic foreign policies . Perhaps because it is easier to be idealistic when thinking very generally about foreign policies than when thinking about specific issues with clear tradeoffs, this idealism was less consistent with respondents’ overall views of international affairs than the more realist foreign policy recommended by the respondents thinking of their own country. About half of respondents (51%/50%) believed that it was in a state’s overall best interests to compromise and cooperate with other states rather than to compete to win – though most of them expressed mild (41%/41%) rather than strong support (10%/9%) for a non-zero sum international system . This question also had a notably large number of people who selected “Neither/Don’t Know” (15%/16%). Asking if it was acceptable for a country to pursue its interests to the detriment of other countries tested whether Confucian values were equally supported when the pursuit of state interests was more conflicting. The majority of respondents still disagreed with pursuing a zero-sum approach however there was less support for idealist behavior than in the prior question. There was, again, no significant difference in beliefs between survey versions . Beliefs about foreign and the respondent’s state behavior became increasingly different as the stakes increased. Asked how best to pursue state security, the majority (47%) said that a foreign state should support international laws and institutions while the majority (37%) would advise their own state to possess sufficient superior military power so that, even when opposed, it can still achieve its vital interests . Alliances and a sufficiently strong military deterrent was the least popular answer for both survey versions (24%/30%). Respondents were asked the extent to which they agreed with Thucydides’ amoral and anarchic description of the international system. A 48%/48% majority of respondents mildly agreed, 66%/67% strongly or mildly agreed, and 28%/26% mildly or strongly disagreed . Although responses were about the same for both versions, they were more strongly related to the respondent’s overall views of international relations for those thinking of their own state. Thus, as was seen with the question about whether foreign policy should more consider how the world should be or how the world actually is, those thinking about foreign states tended to endorse more idealistic behavior while still holding realist views of the international system. Respondents were asked whether “The world’s history of violent and nonviolent international disagreements, conflicts and competition are largely” due to human nature or competition over limited resources. The insignificant relationship observed between this question and overall views of IR made sense since Confucian and political realism do not necessarily disagree on this issue. It is, however, a fundamental difference between classical and structural political realist theory. The overwhelming majority of respondents agreed with the structural notion that competition over limited resources was the primary cause of wars (86%/88%) while 12%/10% said it was due to human nature and 2%/2% said for other reasons . These results may also be influenced by the Confucian-Mencian belief that humans are inherently good. However, human behavior should to be seen as the primary cause for most conflicts in order to believe that providing proper role models and moral education are more effective than using force to resolve them. Force would be considered necessary and more effective if survival depends upon winning the constant competition over limited resources in an anarchic world. Thus, the structural realist view supported by the majority of respondents was not coherent with the logic underlying Confucian strategic preferences. Respondents were asked about how “politicians from [their own or of foreign countries] should in practice see the role morality plays in international affairs.” The versions had the same relative ranking of the answer options although the strength of support for each answer significantly differed . The most popular response, by far, was that “Governments and individuals have different roles and responsibilities so they have different standards of what is right and wrong. For a government, what is morally right is what best meets its obligations to its people - the survival of the country and the good of its own citizens” (46%/50%). With less than half the support – but still much more than for the remaining options – was another “Dirty Hands” belief that “What is morally correct should always be considered and usually followed. However, although it does not make it morally right, sometimes it is necessary for a country to behave immorally in order to protect its citizens” (22%/22%). Moral preference to those with whom there is a special relationship is acceptable according to Confucianism but not when it is at the strong detriment of others. The inextricable relationship between morality and politics means that politics and politicians are not subject to different moral rules or standards than regular citizens . The contextual nature of Confucian virtue ethics also means that there are no absolute moral rules to break and, thus, no concept analogous to Western Dirty Hands . Strong moral beliefs were seen by the 14%/11% of respondents who felt that “Morality should shape politics even if doing so means that it constrains and sometimes disadvantages one’s own country.’” A slightly smaller (9%/9%) portion of respondents held the opposing political realist amoral view that “There are universal rights and wrongs but they only apply to how people should treat one another. The world is too competitive and too dangerous to allow these rules to limit the political and military options available to governments and countries.’” Finally, 8%/7% said “There are few or no universal moral standards, morality is just an excuse used by powerful countries to justify preventing weaker countries from challenging the way things currently are.” Like Machiavelli, a notable majority recognized that international politics does have a moral component - though most of them also felt that, in one way or another, state self-interest was either a legitimate bias for assessing what is moral or that it served as a legitimate exemption from ordinary morality . Subtler bias from state interest was also seen in the response patterns for this question. For example, there was greater support for the politics of foreign countries to be constrained by morality than for the respondent’s own country to be so limited. Additionally, respondents thinking of their own country more strongly believed that governments have the moral obligation to prioritize its own people over those of other countries. Compared to the responses above, which all presuppose that morality does belong in politics in some way, there was less bias from those who felt that politics are amoral. Consistent with political realist theory, respondents who believed that politics are amoral saw this as a universally true and applicable condition. Response patterns for this question indicated that the majority’s moral beliefs about state behavior and the use of force, as identified in this study, was based upon how well the proposed act meets the state’s obligation to do what is best for its citizens (68%/72%). This suggested that the assessed morality of such acts would likely be fairly similar for both leaders as well as normal citizens who were reporting what they felt was moral for leaders to do. However, it was also possible that, instead, respondents based the morality of these acts on what they felt individuals rather than states may and may not do. If this were the case, many would consider using force even more permissible for their government if it fulfilled the obligation of the state to prioritize the good of its own people. In summary, composite scores and responses to individual questions did not reflect strong Confucian views of the international system. Statistical models confirmed there to be stronger consensus about less idealistic views for those thinking about their own country than for those thinking of foreign ones. Some evidence of Confucian values was seen from the approximately half of respondents who supported compromise and cooperation though views became more biased as zero-sum direct conflicts of interest were introduced. Support for Confucian virtues was further tempered by an overall generally realist worldview and the fairly widespread belief that greater absolute military power was still essential for national security. Despite morality largely being seen as a legitimate component of politics, it could be quickly disregarded or more favorably redefined when it conflicted with state self-interest. This was more acceptable for the respondent’s own country and as the perceived stakes increased. There was widespread recognition that states – especially China – should cooperate and/or compete not as how best expresses virtue or promotes a harmonious world but rather as is best for state self-interest. H3: Confucianism does not influence beliefs about when force should be and can be used. Moral ideals and their influence on the decision to use force were examined by asking whether it was “morally okay to use force,” “force may be used only because this is an exceptional circumstance but it is still morally wrong,” or if it “is not okay to use force” for five self-defense scenarios and two scenarios about coming to the defense of others. The country of consideration for all questions differed according to survey version. The scales measuring the permissibility of going to war had reasonably- strong composite reliabilities of .53/.52 and n’s of 2253/2277. The mean composite factor scores of .63/.65, medians of .65/.67, and modes of .70/ .87 showed there to be a strong inclination to use force for all the scenarios - though doing so was significantly less permissible for foreign states than for the respondents own. With severity of threat increasing going from left to right columns, the top three composite scores for each version are seen in Table 11 below. Table 11 – Jus ad Bellum Scale Top 3 Reference The use of force was overwhelmingly considered justified if the country of interest “has been physically attacked by another military first” - though respondents were significantly more permissive for their own country doing so than for foreign ones. 94% said that it was moral for their own country to use force in this situation and 5% said it was necessary but immoral while 92% of those considering another country said this was moral and 7% said it was necessary but immoral . This question did not have enough variance in views to provide insight into moral reasoning and, thus, was not included in the models or scales. A large majority also supported preemptively attacking a country “when there is clear evidence that an attack is imminent.” Again, more felt that it was moral for their own country to use force for this fairly clear case of self-defense (69%/74%) while it was seen as more immoral but necessary for foreign countries to do so (27%/22%) . Respondents were asked about using force when an unfriendly country became more threatening because it invaded a neighboring country. In this situation, the actual threat to the country of concern was more uncertain than in the previous scenarios because, although force had been used, it was against a third country. Accordingly, a lesser 35%/36% of respondents considered it moral to use force. However, 51%/52% felt that this was immoral but necessary so, overall, an overwhelming majority of 86%/87% still felt that such a preventative war was permissible. Views did not differ between versions . The fairly low degree of direct threat in this scenario should be below the threshold of making war “necessary” for self-defense for those who hold nonviolent preferences. Such a war against the aggressive occupier could be consistent with the more coercive strategy of “active defense” and the Confucian hegemonic notion of punitive expedition to restore harmony and to demonstrate humaneness. This would still reflect a fairly high sensitivity to threats and the belief that war is the preferred, effective response even when there may reasonably be alternative options to address potential threats. The possible motives of “active defense” and punitive expedition - indicative of a less pacifistic interpretation of Confucianism - were not likely as the majority of respondents felt that such a war would be “immoral but necessary.” Additionally, this scenario is quite similar to China’s Legalist/offensive realist effort to use third countries as an expanded “buffer” between the Han and the Xiongnu discussed in Chapter 3. A quarter of respondents (27%/29%) said that it was moral to use force “when an unfriendly country is being increasingly threatening by rapidly building its military ,” just under half felt that it was necessary but immoral to do so (48%/47%), and 25%/24% felt that this would not be acceptable at all. Even a more aggressive interpretation of Confucianism was not likely to have played a large role in responses as the unfriendly state has not actually used force yet nor has it clearly signaled an intent to attack the respondent’s country of concern. Although the results showed the support for war continuing to decrease as the severity of threat did the same, a large majority of 75%/76% still approved of it. There was no significant difference between versions . When asked about the use of force for the realpolitik reason of “when it is the most effective way to pursue national interests ,” the majority of respondents (61%/62%) said that this was “immoral but necessary.” The equal support for this response for both versions was consistent with the realist belief that the conditions which necessitate the amorality of politics are universal and, thus, equally applicable. A biased application of morality was seen from the 25% who said such a use of force was immoral for a foreign country compared to the 19% who said it was immoral for their own country. The corresponding 14% who said it was moral for other states to use force for this reason compared to 19% who felt it was moral for their country to do so further demonstrated the inconsistency of moral standards . The use of force for state interests could be in line with an interpretation of Confucianism that requires China to maintain regional hegemony. Yet, it would be a stretch to fit a “moral” motive of material profit for China within the Confucian virtues. It also indicated a war-prone zero-sum view of state relations. While possible, again, claims that this was moral were strongly contradicted by the fact that even the majority of respondents believed that material profit as a motive for war was immoral but necessary rather than moral. Overall, there was very strong approval (75%/81%) to use force even when not being threatened. The majority belief that a war for material gains is immoral but necessary, the greater morality for the respondent’s own country to do this, and the little reason for respondents to believe such wars will be to the benefit of all parties makes support for such behavior inconsistent with even a more aggressive version of Confucianism. This situation does not reasonably qualify as “last resort” and is a stretch to claim, even in a zero-sum world, that the harms are justified out of the right to self-defense. The effects of state self-interest on Confucian morality and on the use of force was further investigated using two scenarios that centered on the defense of others. 67%/66% said that it was morally okay to provide military assistance “when a small country that is wrongfully invaded by a stronger country requests help” and 26%/28% said it was immoral but necessary. A smaller majority of 39%/37% believed that it was morally permissible to provide military assistance “to stop massive human rights violations occurring in another country’s internal conflict,” a slightly lesser 37%/36% said this was immoral but necessary, and 24%/27% said such assistance would be completely unacceptable. The similar distribution of responses between versions was consistent with the fact that both scenarios contained no appreciable state self-interest for respondents . Military interventions for both of these situations could easily be justified according to the standards of punitive expeditions as well as by Confucian virtues though it should be more moral to stop the more egregious, deontological “massive human rights violations.” Instead, the morality and the overall permissibility of these uses of force to help others corresponded to whether or not the sovereignty of another state was violated. Protection of fundamental rights to safety is a straightforward deontological issue, consistent with Confucian virtues, while the sovereignty of states contains little moral import in contemporary Western thinking about human rights and even less according to traditional Confucian thinking. A more likely explanation for such strong emphasis on this relatively modern concept is China’s recent history of foreign state interventions and occupations. Many of those who felt that it was not fully moral to use force to help others instead believed such interventions were immoral but necessary. This perception of necessity likely reflects the recognition of a moral obligation to help in such dire circumstances since there was no potential for the respondent’s state to receive any real material benefit. Thus, the majority of respondents felt that both the violation of sovereignty and the obligation to help those who are severely suffering were moral issues. As a result, the strong support for using force to help others despite the non-Confucian but moral and pragmatic influence of state sovereignty demonstrated beliefs consistent with the Confucian concern for others and virtues such as humanness. At the same time, the highly-situational aspect of Confucian virtue as well as its emphasis on integrity make the recognition of moral conflicts unlikely . This scenario has some important similarities and differences in concepts as well as response patterns to the one where “an unfriendly country becomes more threatening because it invaded a” neighboring country. There was significantly stronger belief that it is moral to help a wrongfully invaded country that requests it (67%66%) than a more proximate invaded country that did not ask for help (35%/36%). There was also greater overall acceptability to do so (93%/93% vs 76%/73%). Stronger support for a war in defense of others than in self-defense was unexpected based upon China’s principled and pragmatic strong dislike of interventions by third party states and its sensitivity to most any threat. It is not likely that this was because the wording “when a small country that is wrongfully invaded by a stronger country” more clearly conveyed the righteousness of an intervention because the other scenario also uses the verb “invaded” – which implies wrongful behavior. Similarly, respondents may have been more sympathetic to a smaller country invaded by a “stronger” one except that Confucianism doesn’t strongly consider power disparities when evaluating morality. Though not grounded in Confucianism, there is some anecdotal evidence that Chinese hierarchical thinking tends to reflect the opposite where “might makes right” and this benefits China as it is the large country in the region. Confucian ideals would also more likely lead to a strong moral obligation for a punitive expedition to stop massive human rights violations in another country than to assist a country that was invaded. Yet the moral support for an intervention to stop massive human rights abuses was similar as for countering an unfriendly country that invaded a neighboring country. This further suggests that respondents assign state sovereignty significant moral value. State sovereignty may have had a notable moral component that was not quickly altered by self-interest but the sanctity of non-interference was consistently trumped by it. This was further seen by the fact that a clear, urgent humanitarian intervention by the respondent’s country was less acceptable than a war to pursue economic, security, etc. national interests (27% vs 19% said “not okay for this reason”) and was about the same for foreign countries (24% vs 25%) – though the intervention was more moral (39%/37% vs 14%/19%). In contrast, the morality of providing requested help to the country wrongfully invaded was almost the equivalent as in self-defense when “there is clear evidence that an attack is imminent” (67%/66% vs 69%/74%). Respondents were also asked the more general question, “Primarily, war should be avoided because it” either “causes too much suffering and harm for everyone involved” or because it “is not an effective way for a country to pursue its interests and goals.” Contradicting the clear readiness of respondents to recommend using force, a very strong majority (84%/83%) said it was because of the suffering and harm, 13%/14% said war was bad because of the realist amoral reasoning that it was ineffective (13%/14%), and 3% said “Other.” The distribution of responses did not differ between versions . These responses could suggest that most respondents saw force as effective but it also could have been that they felt it was generally ineffective but the suffering and harm were more important drawbacks. There were several reasons why the first explanation was more likely. For one, respondents who were against war because of the suffering it creates were more supportive of using force in defense of other states already experiencing armed conflict than those who felt that war is an ineffective tool for resolving such problems . This implies that force was seen as harmful but effective. This was also coherent with the belief that creating some additional suffering by such a use of force is counterbalanced by the fact that, especially since the country is already experiencing armed conflict, the predicted results of doing so could outweigh the results of taking no action. Yet, the lower support from those concerned about the efficacy of force is also coherent with the belief that the ineffective use of force would not improve conditions but instead would only create more harm. Thus, it could be argued that the disinclination to use force for either reason derived from Confucian moral thinking rather than from pragmatic realism. However, those who felt that using force was ineffective were more permissive than those thinking about the suffering of war to let foreign states persist in such folly as they pleased. They were clearly less concerned about the unnecessary harm other states may create in their unproductive efforts for self-defense. Additionally, there was no correlation between those who felt that their state should avoid war because it unnecessarily created substantial suffering and destruction and how they assessed the permissibility of going to war . In other words, that war is generally ineffective made it no more or less permissible to be used in defense of their own country. This was not consistent with a Confucian moral position that it was the harm caused by the ineffectiveness of using force which makes it an undesirable act. The scenarios with the lowest support for using force still had 75% of respondents endorsing foreign states going to war and 73% for their own state. This overall strong proclivity – and the implied belief that force is an effective tool for achieving goals - provided a strong case that Confucian beliefs did not influence strategic preferences. Individual responses and CFA models further revealed that the use of force in self-defense was considered more permissible and more moral for their own state than for foreign states . This disparity was increasingly true as the immediacy/severity of the implied threat increased. However, those with realist beliefs – likely due to recognizing that structural conditions affected the role of morality in politics the same for all states – saw the necessity of immoral uses of force as more equally legitimate for all states. H4: Confucianism does not influence how force should be and can be used. MORAL IDEALS Evaluating the moral permissibility of many behaviors in war based upon whether doing this harm would bring about a better end than doing nothing or by whether this harm violates certain moral imperatives would result in opposite conclusions. Even acts thought to be immoral may still be acceptable if deemed necessary due to the severity of the situation. However, the use of force for any of these reasons would look exactly the same to an outside observer. That is why characterizing the moral content of observed behavior requires knowing which method of moral reasoning was used in the decision-making process and whether morality mattered at all. A general sense of whether respondents evaluated morality based upon the ends or means was established by asking “If it does not change who actually wins the war, do you believe it is better to have” a quick but unrestrained or a longer but more restrained war? The majority of respondents felt that there was less overall harm done by ending the war quickly (58%/61%) rather than by limiting the day-to-day suffering and destruction of violent conflict (42%/39%). Yet, not only was there greater support that the ends morally justified the means for the respondent’s own state than for foreign states but, in fact, there was little-to-no relationship between how respondents of both versions answered this question and their composite score for moral tactics in war - which hinged on the same issue. Ethical reasoning about when it is acceptable to harm noncombatants in order to weaken the enemy was examined in more detail by asking respondents about the morality of using anti- personnel mines, of depriving civilians of basic necessities, and of attacking enemy combatants in towns. Composite scores of .26/.30 indicated widespread belief that the military advantages from these tactics did not justify the harms they would likely inflict. The composite reliabilities for these scales were a very respectable .65/.63 and their n’s were 1819/1659. The top three composite scores for each version are displayed in Table 12 below. Table 12 – Jus in Bello Scale Top 3 Reference Testing the permissibility of directly targeting noncombatants, a small 9%/10% of respondents felt that it was morally okay for soldiers and fighters to intentionally deprive “an innocent civilian population of food, medicine or water in order to weaken the enemy” while the strong majority (84%/81%) said this was unacceptable. This was consistent with deontological and Confucian ethics. However, respondents felt more strongly that this was immoral for foreign countries to do and were more conflicted about whether their own country could . Testing the moral implications of intentionality respondents were also asked whether “enemy soldiers in populated villages or towns [may] be attacked in order to weaken the enemy, knowing that many innocent civilians would be killed.” The majority felt this was also immoral (73%/71%) though the decreased intentionality to harm noncombatants compared to withholding life-sustaining supplies did correspond to it being seen as more morally acceptable (19%/18%). It also caused greater uncertainty (8%/11%) – especially for those considering the behavior of their own military . The majority of respondents also felt that it was immoral to plant “landmines to stop the movement of enemy combatants even though innocent civilians may step on them accidentally” (55%/47%). This question had the least amount of intentionality to harm innocents of all three acts as well as the most support for being morally acceptable behavior in war (31%/36%). It also had the highest rates of uncertainty (14%/18%) and the strongest bias between versions . These patterns of responses as well as CFA models showed that many respondents considered it immoral to harm innocents even when it would weaken the enemy. The importance of moral principles and intentionality compared to the importance of the predicted results of behavior was consistent with deontological and virtue ethical theories as well as with Confucianism. Yet, this is contradicted by the fact that deontological considerations were much more inviolable for other states than for the respondents’ and/or what is virtuous in the same situation varies upon the agent . Also, as seen with jus ad bellum beliefs, bias from state self-interest increased as the morality of the example became more difficult to evaluate. MORAL CONVICTION The ultimate test of the role of morality is whether it constrains from doing what is considered most effective when the two conflict. The survey measured moral conviction by testing how proportionality, reciprocity, just cause, and supreme emergency changed the permissibility of the aforementioned three behaviors in war. Respondents were asked if these considerations changed their mind about the use of the immoral tactics. The answers choices for all four questions were “No Change,” there is now “no problem at all doing some of these things,” it is now sufficiently necessary so “although it is still against my moral beliefs, some of these actions may be done because of the exceptional circumstances,” and the recognition of Dirty Hands where, “although it would have been better to avoid doing some of these actions, the new circumstances make doing some of them morally okay.” Composite scores of .37/.38 indicated that respondents were not strongly constrained by morality but also not quick to change their moral beliefs about harming civilians as convenient. These scales had strong composite reliabilities of .78/.79 and n’s of 2291/2284. Details about the top three scores for each version are reported in Table 13 below. Table 13 – Moral Conviction Scale Top 3 Reference Earlier, the results for the jus ad bellum scenarios showed that Just Cause was an important consideration for the morality of going to war. As discussed in Chapter Two, some scholars have suggested that Confucianism holds that a war started for the just cause of creating a harmonious society under China’s moral governance means it is moral to use whatever tactics are necessary to bring about this improved situation as quickly as possible. On the other hand, the Confucian virtues of ren and li would discourage inflicting unnecessary harm on one’s own military, general population, and those of the enemy as well. These competing interpretations were further tested by asking if the permissibility of the three acts in war changed when “the other country physically attacked first.” Slightly over a third of respondents felt that even such a clear case of self-defense did not justify immoral behavior (36%/37%), about another third now believed that at least one of the acts could be done out of necessity but remained immoral (38%/34%), 19%/21% found doing the immoral act regrettable but morally permissible, and 7%/8% felt the act became morally acceptable. Although being the clear victim of another state’s violent aggression did not convince most that it was now totally moral to harm civilians in order to weaken the enemy, it did convince many that immoral acts were necessary and even partially moral. There was no major difference in views between survey versions . The small portion of the increased support that came from those who felt the immoral tactics were now more moral did not demonstrate strong agreement that most any tactics are permitted once the righteousness of the war has been established. It also did not reflect the moral conviction of a punitive expedition or Confucian virtue ethics, more generally. Those who felt harming noncombatants was now partially moral plus the substantial 38%/34% who felt it was now immoral but acceptable to do so instead indicated recognition that having been attacked was not sufficiently severe to negate the immorality of harming innocents but it did hesitantly permit such acts. This pattern of responses did not reflect the deontological belief that rights are absolute rather than contingent on proper behavior. The observed weakening of the enemy’s right to basic deontological protections did show the greater relative importance of the ends over the means. However, the small resulting increase in morality and the small additional military advantage of using the immoral tactics compared to the increased harms of doing so suggested that the shift in acceptability also did not derive from the teleological jus in bello notion of proportionality. The moderate change in views of most respondents most likely reflected the conflict between the righteousness that comes from a clear motive of self-defense and the unavoidable and unvirtuous accompanying increase in harm inflicted. Reciprocity is a fundamental component of Confucian and Western morality but can be a pragmatic motivation as well. The moral power of negative reciprocity was seen from both the 23%/24% who felt that it became somewhat morally acceptable to do the acts “if the other side started violating these limits first” and the 8%/8% who felt that such behavior made the immoral acts completely moral. The 36%/33% who said that it was immoral but necessary to respond in kind saw reciprocity as an amoral pragmatic issue. The immoral behavior of the other state did not outweigh the moral conviction of the remaining approximate third of respondents (33%/35%). The responses, overall, showed that the transgressions of the enemy had greater influence on permissibility of harming innocents than a clear just cause. Interestingly, the legitimacy of reciprocity, a notion based upon justice qua fairness, did not differ between those thinking of their own state and those thinking of foreign ones . The results did not reflect strong respect for reciprocity as defined by Confucius in Analects 15.24, “What you do not want done to yourself, do not do to others.” Still, reciprocity had a larger effect on making immoral acts more moral than when the other country attacked first, indicating that jus in bello considerations have somewhat greater influence than jus ad bellum ones for what constitutes moral behavior in war. On the other hand, most of those who changed their mind about the permissibility of immoral tactics tended to see this as a pragmatic necessity. This reflected a high sensitivity to threat and contradicted the Confucian stance that there is greater moral and/or pragmatic benefit to limiting the harms of war on civilians. Without the benefit of incentivizing the other side from escalating to additional harms, the albeit small military advantage from the immoral tactics took priority. Again, moral factors such as deontological noncombatant immunity, teleological consideration of proportionality, and the embodiment of humaneness and compassion were clearly not important enough to constrain seeking amoral small tactical advantages due to the additional suffering and harm they would inflict. When told that the immoral tactics would make the difference between losing and winning a battle, 38%/35% said this would not change their mind, 33%/34% felt that the acts were now “immoral but permitted due to exceptional circumstances,” 20%/21% felt the improved proportionality made the acts “partially moral,” and 9%/10% felt there was now “no moral problem” doing them. The difference between the distributions of responses had a borderline p value of .06 . The most popular single response to this question was that there was no change in permissibility for the three acts but the overall majority felt the immoral acts could now be done. Thus, as seen with the other questions about moral conviction, morality largely did not constrain behavior but fundamental beliefs about harming innocents were also not readily redefined according to what was most convenient. Again, favorable consequences were more important that limiting the harms of war but, contrary to teleological proportionality and the defining role of motive in Confucian virtue ethics, it did not become significantly more moral even when done for the right reasons. The accuracy of this finding, that of the survey questionnaire, and evidence of some degree of consistency in actual moral reasoning was further supported by the fact that CFA showed strong coherence between how respondents weighed the teleological jus in bello principle of proportionality and the deontological principle of discrimination in this question and how they did so for the other survey questions that also centered on “ends versus means.” When told that “the enemy’s goal is not just victory but total destruction of the country,” the majority of respondents felt that “there now is no problem at all doing some of these things” (38%/41%), 22%/20% did not change their mind, another 22%/20% felt that the acts remained immoral but could be done “due to exceptional circumstances,” and 18%/19% said that “although it would have been better to avoid doing some of these actions, the new circumstances make doing some of them morally okay.” Of the four questions about moral conviction, this one resulted in the greatest change in the assessed morality as well as the overall permissibility of the acts. Though this use of force could, at a stretch, be considered a last resort for self-defense, which would be consistent with Confucian beliefs, the intentional harming of innocent people in exchange for the small increase in military advantage from doing any of these tactics would not be. Furthermore, stating that the intent of the enemy was total destruction of the other country has no implications regarding the enemy’s probability of success. Increased severity of the enemy’s goals rather than increased severity of the threat they pose does not qualify as a true “supreme emergency.” The readiness which respondents still ignored or altered the moral beliefs in these scenarios thus demonstrated their high sensitivity to even superficial perceptions of threat. These results further showed that, as was seen with the assessed permissibility of going to war, the moral standards for the respondents’ state and for foreign states to use force became increasingly partial and subjective as the immediacy/severity of the implied threat increased . Such findings cast further doubt that Confucian virtues such as reciprocity, humaneness, and acting as the moral example truly influence the use of force. There was, overall, little evidence of moral conviction. A total 64%/63% of respondents would permit previously-considered immoral acts when it was a clear case of self-defense, 67%/65% when the other side started doing the act first, 62%/65% when it determined the outcome of a battle, and 78%/80% when the enemy’s goal was total destruction. Composite scale scores also showed that respondents felt that their own state had significantly greater permissibility to do these immoral acts than foreign states . Clearly, moral ideals did not strongly constrain behavior in war, yet, at the same time, most did not consider morality in war wholly inapplicable - there was still an irreducible moral remainder - or “Dirty Hands.” Such fine grained post hoc analysis – and even the ideal of Dirty Hands - is not expected from Confucianism which, as a virtue ethic, determines morality based upon holistic assessment of the overall situation . The role of Confucianism was tested by examining not only whether beliefs and behavior remained consistent with moral ideals when this would be at the detriment of self- interest but also when the only reason to do so would be because it was the right thing to do. Morality according to virtue ethics, especially, requires doing what best expresses virtuous character regardless of whether this would also have material rewards. Especially since China is the third largest seller of weapons in the world and does not release full details of its deals, this was examined by asking, “When considering selling weapons to other countries or fighters, how much moral responsibility should foreign countries/your country have for considering how these weapons may be used?” . Almost half of respondents (46%/48%) said that “it is morally okay to sell weapons only to those who you strongly believe will use them only in ways in which you morally agree” 31%/25% believed “It is never morally okay to sell weapons because you would become at least partially responsible for the resulting death and suffering,” 17%/20% selected “It is morally okay to sell weapons to your allies and others who share common national interests,” 5%/6% said “Business is business so even if the weapons are used in a morally wrong way, the seller has no moral responsibility,” and no more than 1%/1% felt that “It is morally okay to sell to anyone who is willing to buy.” The comparatively greater importance of the “means,” the strong influence of intentionality, and the lesser weight of common end goals seen from the results of this question were more consistent with deontological moral reasoning than teleological. Strong overall approval for enabling the expansion of violence in the world - and making a profit doing so - were not remarkably consistent with Confucian virtues though. Even more so since the answer choice which accepts partial responsibility for the harms done from selling weapons to others was where there was the largest difference between the standards for foreign countries and the respondents own country . H1: Confucianism does not influence the strategic preferences of elite Chinese students. The Confucian worldview and the Confucian conception of moral governance are based upon a common framework of coherent moral principles. Political realist theory similarly posits there to be a direct, rational relationship between how the world is believed to operate and the appropriate role of morality in state behavior. Indeed, correlations between respondents’ composite scale scores indicated there was a meaningful relationship between fundamental beliefs and how they were interpreted and applied to international relations. Professed beliefs did influence preferences - but only very moderately. The extent to which respondent’s saw the world as a collaborative idealist Confucian environment moderately influenced their beliefs about the permissibility of going to war . The respondent’s worldview had a substantial effect on whether, in principle, it was morally acceptable to harm innocents to achieve military objectives but had substantially less impact on whether such moral ideals should actually constrain behavior . The morality of prioritizing the ends over the means as well as the importance of not violating moral ideals were more strongly influenced by how dangerous the world was perceived to be for the respondents’ own country while these standards were stricter and more objective for foreign states. Stronger consideration of context for what the respondents’ own state could do resulted in greater permissibility to use force because these respondents viewed the world as more competitive, zero sum, and dangerous. Whether respondents prioritized weighing the ends or the means to determine what was morally acceptable moderately affected how readily they would abandon moral concern in favor of other considerations . So, even strong beliefs about what was moral to do in war inevitably exerted fairly modest influence on decisions about what could actually be done. Confucian values were more likely to influence moral ideals about war but did not strongly influence the actual use of force. Beliefs about when the anticipated benefits of going to war warranted the accompanying suffering and destruction did not strongly predict beliefs about when the expected benefits of certain tactics in war warranted its accompanying suffering and destruction . The extent to which respondents felt that going to war would be immoral because the benefits would not justify the harm to noncombatants only somewhat related to whether they felt that the morality of tactics in war was defined by the degree and intentionality of suffering that it would inflict on noncombatants. Put another way, whether there was a Just Cause to go to war had less impact on what was morally justified for the respondent’s state to do in war while what foreign countries may do in war depended more upon whether the war, itself, was moral. Respondents were inconsistent and incoherent in the interpretation and application of other, related moral beliefs. How strongly respondents believed that it was immoral to harm noncombatants in war had very little influence on how acceptable they believed it was to start a war that would inevitably also harm noncombatants . Again, these related issues were seen to be more strongly related for the more normative and impartial case of what foreign states should do. DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE FINDINGS Findings supported Johnston’s assessment that the Chinese tended to view warfare, “as a relatively constant element in human interaction, stakes in conflict with the adversary are viewed in zero-sum terms, and pure violence is highly efficacious for dealing with threats that the enemy is predisposed to make” . Respondents also showed a strong preference for offensive force, for prioritizing the ends over the means, for disregarding the immorality of unnecessarily harming combatants and civilians, and for believing these were necessary and legitimate for self-defense. While the correlation and causal relationships between these issues were found to be nontrivial, perceptions of the international system and state behavior in it explained only a small amount of respondents’ beliefs about the use of force. This was true regardless of whether assumptions and beliefs more closely resembled Confucianism or realism. The two most logical questions from these findings are “what caused this divergence?” and “what would make the Confucian model more accurate?” As previously discussed, the standard process for the development of international relations/foreign policy theory generally starts ”with qualitative methods to build an initial theoretical framework and then using the quantitative methods to test and extend that theory” . This study follows the common practice that “in quantitative studies, one uses theory deductively and places it toward the beginning of the proposal for a study. With the objective of testing or verifying a theory rather than developing it, the researcher advances a theory, collects data to test it, and reflects on its confirmation or disconfirmation by the results” . Accordingly, whereas “qualitative methodologies are inductive, that is, oriented toward discovery and process,” this quantitative study uses “deductive logic with precise empirical observations of individual behavior in order to discover and confirm a set of probabilistic causal laws that can be used to predict general patterns of human activity” . As the goal of this study was to confirm the influence of the Confucianism rather than to explore and identify unexpected factors potentially relevant to development or refinement of it as an international relations theory, Confucianism was treated as an a priori hypothesis/theory and its framework of causal axioms was intentionally kept the same as what was used by prior studies . This is also why Confirmatory Factor Analysis/SEM was the primary method of investigation instead of Exploratory Factor Analysis . The implications of the results are relevant to the political realist model as well because both theories use the same metrics and are based upon the same premise of rational choice - though any insights into the accuracy of the realist model should be considered informal as the study did not specifically test realist theory. The CFA methodology quantifies the relationships between the concepts which constitute Confucian theory. The causal analysis CFA technique of SEM was used because “research…based upon case studies of historical events…often don’t provide the insights key for determining which, if any, of the potential factors might have been responsible” . Correlation shows which issues are conceptually related to one another for respondents while causation shows which issues influence the decision-making process. These identify the issues which, in principle, are related, relevant, coherent, and consistent but, in reality, are not an important component of foreign policy reasoning. Existing theory can be refined based upon the clarification of where inductive exploration has misinterpreted coincidence as correlation and where it has mistakenly assigned causation when there was only correlation. However, this process of “eliminating” superfluous issues does not provide any additional context about what other unidentified and not obviously-related factors might be involved. More specifically, Confucian and realist IR theory assume that the issues most relevant to shaping strategic preferences and reasoning about the use of force are beliefs about the inevitability and efficacy of war as well as whether state relations are zero-sum. Results showed that these issues were conceptually related to one another and to overall worldviews for many respondents but beliefs about each one was more strongly shaped by other, unrelated considerations. However, precise quantification of the strength of the relationships between constituent issues does not provide suggestions for what else may have contributed to beliefs about whether international relations are zero-sum, violent, anarchic, and based upon power; whether it is better to compete or cooperate with compromises; and whether force is necessary and effective for pursuing state interests. The respectable correlation but low causation between views of international relations and the use of force functioned similarly. Respondents generally felt that the world is zero- sum, highly prone to violence, and war was undesirable but often necessary. Their general proclivity to resort to war to counter most any threat – and also when it appeared to be the best way to pursue material benefits - despite such uses of force still having been seen as immoral but necessary was consistent with their expressed worldview. The connection between beliefs and preferences was also consistent with the axioms that define the theory of Confucian strategic culture but the low causality between them meant that the first did not very well explain the second. Especially since these findings did not eliminate any theorized issues of consideration to narrow down the possible causes, they also did not provide any insights into potential reasons for the divergence. While it is possible to broadly speculate about possible additional issues, the careful selection, control, and measuring of factors and sources of errors necessary to ensure statistical rigor meant that any post hoc discovery of potential influences should be noted for future study but they are neither valid as-is nor should the same dataset be used to validate them . One reason is that such “data dredging” or “data mining” increases the potential for inaccurate findings due to Type I errors such as spurious relationships, confirmation bias, selection bias, and chance . Broadly speaking, the most likely reasons for the small causal relationships between assumptions and preferences were that respondents were inconsistent in how they considered foreign policy and war or that the axioms of the established Confucian model captured only some of the actual influential considerations. The most relevant indications from statistical analysis did not reveal any additional potentially-meaningful common factors nor did the error terms of the four tested factors show any unexplained, substantial covariance that might indicate one. This roughly suggested there were no additional issues or considerations which substantially influenced overall or specific beliefs. On the other hand, irrational reasoning or decisions should lead to weak rather than the observed reasonably strong correlations between factors and between factors and variables. 
FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS OF RATIONAL CHOICE THEORIES 
The small influence of worldviews on preferences and behavior may have been, in part, due to the Confucian strategic culture model’s level of analysis. SEM latent factors are a conceptual depiction of the theoretical components of the rational decision-making process regarding the use of force. The variables, measures, and overall model design were based upon the assumption that, though there are many potential confounding factors, rational states seek to identify and enact the option that minimizes risks and maximizes its interests – which, according to political realist theory is, ultimately, power or at least security . As discussed in Chapter Three, strategic culture addresses one possible confounding influence by acting as a “lens” that helps explain how the decision to use force could be rational despite it appearing to be contrary to the best way according to political realist assumptions to pursue security . In this way, Confucian theory functions – and can be tested - according to the same “rules” of rational choice as political realism. For example, prior studies point to the Confucian belief that war is less effective than harmony for promoting the near-universal development of virtuous character to explain how it could be rational to not use force when it is the most effective means to achieve political goals. In the same way, the high sensitivity to threats that may have derived from China’s long history of frequent conflicts may contribute to its belief that aggressive force in self-defense is required to counter most any contemporary danger and so is consistent with Confucianism . International relations theories may differ in their key assumptions as well as derivative beliefs, preferences, and desired goals but, in order to be rational, the components of the theory must be coherent and consistent with one another. Similarly, rational decisions must show coherence between beliefs and “the desirability of the outcome” ; they must be consistent with the ranking of preferences and with prior decisions; and they “rests on logic and adheres to the principles of statistical inference” . As a result, Confucianism and realism both function as normative theories because they represent how a perfectly rational decision ought to lead to selecting the best option to achieve the most logical goal. The requirements for rationality and the assumption that Confucian and realist decision- making desire to follow them establish a conceptual connection so that observed behavior can be traced back to identify the operable preferences and beliefs . Doing so allows the models to be tested against empirical evidence where the beliefs and preferences serve as falsifiable rules. Based upon this presumed relationship, prior studies have inferred whether motives and intentions come from Confucian beliefs and assumptions by looking at how consistent observed behavior is with these abstract norms. Demonstrated inconsistencies help locate which issues which were the likely the source of divergence but no additional context is provided to assist understanding what caused the difference in thinking. Just as how realist assumptions did not strongly determine the preferences and decisions of those who demonstrated strongly non-Confucian beliefs, there was little evidence that sensitivity to threat had a strong deterministic role in the decisions of those who expressed Confucian worldviews. Similarly, there was clear evidence that war was seen as undesirable but likely, often necessary, and an effective means of dealing with threats though this was not substantially responsible for the observed proclivity to use it . This suggested that the defining psychological factors of the strategic cultural lens were less influential sources of cognitive bias than assumed. Reported results of respectable correlation but low causation from the strategic culture considerations may have been due, in part, to inherent theoretical constraints of testing Confucianism according to the assumptions of strategic culture theory. Evaluating the rationality of real world decisions that deviate from realist assumptions requires a comprehensive, alternate paradigm comprised of falsifiable, internally-consistent metrics. Studies of psychological influences on decision-making have found that “cognitive predispositions or mindsets,” generally conforming to theory, have greater influence on perception than the relevant information . So, like realist theory, the concept of strategic culture accordingly presumes that there exists only one rational decision for any situation and that following what is theoretically logical will always and exclusively reveal the best approach to achieving predetermined, theory-specific goals . The paradigm’s underlying rationale also includes the assumption that the desire for coherency and for adherence to objective standards is universal, sufficient, and effective at limiting options and guiding judgments . These assumptions establish a direct cause-effect relationship between the means from the ends so that theoretical beliefs and cognitive ideals function as testable injunctive norms . In order to preserve the falsifiability and applicability of an agent-agnostic theory that selectively considers contextual bias, the cognitive factors of strategic culture are assumed to operate at the cultural-organizational level and are the only legitimate sources of subjective influence on impartial reasoning . The result is that “culture is best understood as a supplement to and not a substitute for, realist theories of strategic choice. Strategic culture can certainly help to explain ‘deviations’ from balancing behavior, but since the very concept of such deviations presumes some sort of appropriate or expected response to international conditions, it is only within a realist framework that such explanations make any sense” . In other words, strategic culture “solves the problem” of how realist theory didn’t explain some behavior by incorporating cultural-psychological factors to “correct” the source of “irrational processes that resulted in mistaken judgments” . Altering the definition of rationality according to strategic culture makes it inherently different than that from political realist theory as it normalizes but keeps distinct the logic of a specific kind of irrationality. Normative assumptions, preferences, and goals still serve as prescriptive “rules and standards” but the influence of psychological factors is ultimately deemed irrational . Thus, incorporating the concepts of strategic culture circumvents the need to investigate the reason for some inconsistencies but fails to truly reconcile them either. Though this method provides little information that can help refine the metrics for what qualifies as a rational choice, it creates favorable conditions for case study research . The assumptions of strategic culture allow the researcher to assess the rationality of decisions inconsistent with realism by logically inferring from historical evidence the actual and normative beliefs and preferences as well as what and how factors ought to and actually shape them . For example, inductive reasoning has been used to establish that perception of threat is an important causal factor, to create the standards for determining whether the effects of perception were rational, and to characterize the actual perception of threat of a given population. As Alexander George and Andrew Bennett concluded, such “highly general and abstract theories , which set aside intervening processes and focus on correlations between the “start” and the ”finish” of a phenomenon, are too general to make sharp theoretical predictions or to guide policy” . These limitations combined with the assumptions of strategic culture theory mean that anything not explained by realist assumptions, moderated by how a specific culture may perceive the character of the international system and the efficacy of force, is irrational. The reasonable consistency but low causation seen in this study’s results suggest otherwise. Just as how strategic culture theory rationalizes the effects of differences in certain perceptions, it is possible that other instances of divergence from theoretical assumptions, rather than caused by erroneous logic, could be due to issues not considered during analysis. The self-sufficiency and organizational-level of analysis of the Confucian model, necessary for coherence, parsimony, and applicability/utility, may be a reason for the disconnect between respondents’ stated worldviews, preferences, and decisions . Determining whether reasoning was to blame depends upon how the situation was perceived and judged . In other words, how sense was made of the situation and how this information was evaluated in order to make decisions or form opinions. Yet, as Jervis says, “it is hard to know what a person’s perceptions were and even harder to know whether they were correct” – especially if this is done by examining historical evidence . The assumption of strategic culture theory that perceptions are either culturally monolithic or irrelevant makes this even more difficult. This study avoided many of these unknowns by carefully controlling perceptions of the issues addressed by strategic culture theory. Even with known perceptions that can be evaluated for accuracy, numerous studies have shown that, contrary to the assumption of rational choice theories, “most people, most of the time, do not provide the normatively correct answers” . Common sources of “errors and mistakes” uncovered by political psychology research include “the need for cognitive consistency, improper assimilation of new data to old beliefs, the desire to avoid value trade-offs, groupthink, idiosyncratic schemas, motivated or emotional bias, reliance on heuristics because of cognitive limitations, incorrect use of analogies, the framing of information, feelings of shame and humiliation, or a miserable childhood” . While determining the reason why decisions diverged from what was “normatively correct” in the controlled lab environment has been quite successful, it is difficult to extend “this approach to study decision making in international politics” . This is because, as Mercer argues, “discovering the correct error is difficult in an uncontrolled field setting when so many errors are possible” . It is possible that error or bias could have caused thinking to stray from logical consideration of objective, prescriptive norms yet led to conclusions similar to those from objective reasoning. This would account for the observed correlation with low causation seen in the study results. Though not perfect, the use of a survey rather than case studies improved the ability to reduce many of the likely sources of cognitive bias as well as of incorrect perceptions. The good correlation between beliefs, preferences, and decisions indicated these were not a problem and SEM’s precise quantification of errors did not detect the presence of any other significant sources of bias or error. Rather than there being widespread misperceptions or poor judgment, it could be that respondents’ reasoning deceptively appeared irrational due to the assumptions of the established Confucian strategic culture model. Johnston’s separation of strategic culture from behavior creates a falsifiable cause and effect relationship, tested according to how well paradigmatic Confucian assumptions “fit,” or explain, the historical behavior. This process is well suited to “identify the difference between the normative answer and the actual answer as a reasoning bias needing explanation” . Especially using statistical analysis in the carefully controlled survey environment, it can also identify from which prescriptive belief the decision departed. However, as discussed in Chapter 6, the use of theoretical axioms as causal factors and the prescriptive norms derived from them as constraining rules theoretically renders it unnecessary to consider that other issues - such as the complexity, nuance, and uncertainty of actual security concerns and the diversity of human reasoning - may have affected beliefs/assumptions, reasoning, and decision-making . When used to deductively test the validity of an established theory, this analytical procedure is of little help for determining what, if any, other factors had significant influence. The viability of this context-free, rational choice, cultural-level model includes the assumption that reasoning will be clear-headed cost-benefit analysis based upon utility, and that this leads to only one goal and one “best” option to achieve it . This is particularly problematic for judging the rationality of Confucian-guided decisions because the virtuousness of motive is not based upon such context-free calculations of pragmatic efficacy. As discussed in Chapters Two and Three, there is substantial flexibility for how Confucian beliefs and assumptions can be legitimately weighed, interpreted, and applied . Though certainly true when operating in the realm of norms and theory, such variance is more likely to happen - and is more insightful - when applied to real situations. These assumptions and their limitations have led to criticisms that Johnston’s paradigm evaluates actual decisions according to how the “mind works in relation to the way it ought to work” rather than how “the mind works in relation to the way the world works” . One such critic, Colin Gray, argues that the concept of strategic culture ought to account for the fact that “all strategic, operational, and tactical behavior is 'done' by people and organizations that have been encultured supranational, nationally, or sub-nationally” . In other words, the assumptions and perceptions encapsulated in a strategic culture shape beliefs about both the process and the ends. Though Gray concedes that his conception is not falsifiable because strategic culture can’t be separated as an independent variable with behavior as a dependent one, he, indeed, counters that Johnston’s positivist interpretation is too strong because “the idea of strategic culture does not imply that there is a simple one-for-one relationship between culturally traceable preferences and actual operational choices” . In other words, strategic culture doesn’t simply mean that culturally-determined prescriptive norms will be directly applied to any situation where force is being considered. Instead, culturally-influenced consideration of the actual situation will also modify how this is done. Therefore, at least some decisions which appeared “irrational” according to normative expectations were likely believed to be rational by a decider who also took into account the specific issue at hand. Ignoring potential influences may not only result in erroneous characterization of behavior and motive but it can also cause “attribution error” - where the wrong factor is believed to have caused the behavior . One implication is that “irrational” decisions may be considered evidence that disproves the influence of proclaimed beliefs or theory when it could be that behavior consistent with norms was not a rational means to achieve goals if contextual specifics were considered. Conversely, behavior that was consistent with the rational application of assumptions and preferences may support the applicability of that theory but may not have been the best way to achieve goals given the actual circumstances. Indeed, the use of rational actor theories for “inferring preferences from behavior resulted in empirical and theoretical problems” to such an extent that some believe this approach is “empirically useless” . This study’s use of a survey questionnaire more accurately met the requirement that “assessing the rationality of a decision-making process demands that three questions be addressed: What did the actor want, believe, and do?” . Survey findings offered convincing proof that direct solicitation of prescriptive and descriptive beliefs and preferences – and statistical evaluation of their causality as well as correlation to intended behavior – better avoided attribution errors and other pitfalls of inferential case study methodology. Most of those prior studies found that observed behavior and the preferences inferred from them were inconsistent with the assumptions of the normative, context-free pacifistic Confucian model and its inferred behavior. However, Chapters Two and Three showed how Confucianism could endorse militaristic behavior that was very similar to realist predictions if certain contextual factors were taken into account. The prior studies would find this problematic because, for them, the falsifiability of the Confucian paradigm depended upon its assumptions and preferences being opposite of the competing realist paradigm – and that there was a fixed relationship between them and behavior. Incorporating additional contextual influences thus risks creating “problems of “overdetermination” – when two or more sufficient and distinct causes produce the same effect – which, in turn, diminishes the attractiveness of strategic culture as a useful explanation” . More specifically, the survey was set up so that the primary goal, what respondents’ “wanted,” was state security. There was reasonably strong belief that the international system was unfortunately anarchic, conflict prone, and zero-sum. Respondents, accordingly, generally felt it was morally wrong but frequently necessary to counter threats through the use of force. If forced to choose which theory better explained the empirical data, as was the case with most prior studies, the overall pattern of responses in this study appeared more consistent with realist theoretical assumptions than Confucian ideals. An advantage of quantitative deductive analysis was its ability to objectively determine that, despite responses generally reflecting non-Confucian assumptions and preferences, behavior consistently varied according to beliefs about international relations across the entire range of worldviews. Neither theory explained the evidence better than the other. At the same time, because this methodology was also able to test causality, it found that neither the normative Confucian nor the realist paradigmatic beliefs sufficiently explained behavior. In other words, it was likely by coincidence that the theories seemed to provide such good explanations of actual decision-making. Survey results provide a few other clues to help narrow down the factors which may have accounted for variations in responses. For one, the unidentified consideration extraneous to the generally-accepted Confucian and political realist theories, while important, were not contradictory to fundamental beliefs or worldviews. On the other hand, it/they also did not contribute strong moral support for war. This further indicated that, as discussed in Chapter Five, decisions about the use of force were based on a number of different issues. Supported by the fact that the unidentified factors similarly influenced those stating realist and Confucian beliefs, statistical analysis further indicated that the potential additional factor likely operated at the organizational/state/cultural level. Therefore, it is worth returning to the strategic culture concept to look for possible explanations. 
STRATEGIC CULTURE, NATIONALISM, EXCEPTIONALISM 
A more recent study argues that the “national culture variables…that consistently have effect on security policy and that are value-laden for that culture” are “identity, values, norms, and perceptive lens” . There is substantial overlap in the factors that shape these four variables but they can be logically parsed according to how they influence strategic decision-making. Values and norms are conceptions of ideals and the behavior that, through consistency and coherence, embodies them. Identity centers on “the traits of its national character, its intended regional and global roles, and its perceptions of its eventual destiny” while the perceptive lens describes beliefs about one’s national-cultural history and international image; “what motivates others;” what are true “facts;” and the “capabilities of [national] leadership” and “natural resources, and other security-related ideas” . The first set are more independent and inward-facing as they are strongly shaped by one’s own culture while interpretation of the latter is more externally-relational to “the other.” As already extensively discussed, survey results did not indicate the strong presence or influence of Confucian values such as ren and yi – they were also inconsistent with Confucian behavioral norms such as li, filial piety , and reciprocity . This was true even when considered in the international context, when facing varying severities of threat, and when the situation established clear moral justification for war. One notable possible exception was that the importance of harmony and li could be interpreted as incentivizing aggressive rectification of even small threats to a Chinese-led regional order. The widespread believed immorality of using force for these reasons made these exceptions unlikely to be a strong causal factor. Findings that the perceptive lens, as it relates to perception of threat, did exert influence on reasoning but did not sufficiently account for its observed variation has already been discussed. The aspects that were have not yet been addressed focused on beliefs about cultural history and international image. It is very likely that these issues, as well as beliefs about national identity, are strongly shaped by Confucianism . They are also the major constitutive elements of Chinese nationalism. Nationalism can be defined as “a set of beliefs emphasizing the primacy and virtues of a shared ethnic, cultural and political identity for a discrete population” . The moral, cultural, and material superiority of the Sino-centric Confucian model of governance led to an innate sense of entitlement and civilizational supremacy that transcended territorial boundaries . China defined what “civilization” was, and the enculturation of invaders and the tributary system were some of the proof . These affirmed the superiority and centrality of the “Central Kingdom” and established a normative, bilateral system of international relations where all others were uncivilized barbarians who were treated equally and with humanness . Confucian China’s moral superiority was further demonstrated by the “perception that the tribute system was economically ruinous for China, since it paid more than it received” . The strong conviction of China’s preeminence came to an abrupt end with the start of the Opium Wars in 1839 and continued until the founding of modern China in 1949. “When the assumptions of that civilization and its institutions were destroyed, nationalism arouse as an alternative for Chinese emotions and energy. Not surprisingly, the national expression was strong because it drew upon values and traditions that had existed continuously for over 2,000 years” . “Rooted in China's imperial ideology of Confucian culturalism,” China’s narrative of their “century of humiliation” at the hands of the West and Japan created an “emotional imperative” of reassuming “its rightful place” as a “Great Power” . China has regularly insisted that, consistent with Confucian principles, it will pursue these goals in a peaceful, “orderly,” and non-expansionist way . Yet, “nationalism includes a more emotional and normative commitment to the political/economic/social status quo or putative status quo , as well as the denigration of the traits of out-groups ” . This helps “not only to ensure domestic stability” but also to give “the people a common agenda for unity and identity” . But modern China’s “intense nationalistic pride over international recognition and acceptance” also means that Chinese nationalists are more likely to “feel slighted” and to “take offense” anytime they perceive that interference with China’s ability to pursue, “on their own terms,” territorial unity, independent sovereignty, and “international recognition” and “legitimacy” . Additionally, because China’s legitimacy as a state is “rooted in the Confucian concept of fuqing or wealth and power” , “national salvation by removing the stigma of a victim nation” requires a “proactive and assertive” foreign policy that creates “an international order favourable to China’s rise as a great power” . “Therefore, not only does China need to achieve strategic parity but it also needs to change the rules of the game in international relations. In a nutshell, to reﬂect politically and militarily its already economic weight” . Not only does Chinese nationalism contain strong signs of Confucian influence but it also has striking similarities with political realist theory. Indeed, Guang argues this is because “some of the prevailing norms of the Westphalian international system have been integrated into and thus made part of the Chinese national discourse” . The “fusion of political realism and nationalistic aspirations,” which he calls “realpolitik nationalism,” implies that “hard-edged realist ideals and ideas about state power and geopolitics [are] clothed in the garb of nationalism” . In his words, Realpolitik nationalism is thus composed of a set of nationalist beliefs built around a fundamental set of realist ideas of power politics. In other words, it is an ideology that elevates realist considerations of power, articulated expressly in the ideas of territorial integrity, sovereignty, and international legitimacy, to the level of a national imperative for the country and thereby makes these very ideas the constitutive elements of a modern Chinese national identity. According to this theory and echoing the theoretical function of strategic culture, nationalism may cause perceptions, behavior, or goals to deviate from what would be considered “rational” according to realpolitik’s “relentless pursuit of material powers and interests unencumbered by ideational factors” . Though it may be going too far to say that the power of realpolitik nationalism “derives not from citizens’ depth of feelings about their nation’s history or their ethnic identity, but from the key ideas in the international society,” survey results strongly support the notion that China’s strategic culture is influenced by an understanding of nationalism that combines Confucian ideology and political realist beliefs . This perceptive lens emphasizes the pursuit and recognition of national wealth and power as these goals are consistent with both realist assumptions and the Confucian model of governance. Combined under the rubric of nationalism, this was likely an important reason for respondents’ strategic preferences and decisions generally being inconsistent with Confucian pacifistic ideals. Whereas respondents who subscribe to either belief system would accordingly agree about the critical importance of military strength, those with more Confucian beliefs would be less likely to see war as moral and, perhaps, to consider it quite as permissible to attain the same goals. This would contribute to the observed variation in strategic preferences and endorsed behavior that, while still generally militaristic, correlated with stated worldviews and normative beliefs across the spectrum. In this way, nationalism functioned as a culturally- contextual perception of cultural history, international image, and national identity that contributed to “irrational” deviations between “how the mind works and how it should work.” The use of a strategic culture construct that omitted nationalism also was one likely reason why the widely-accepted paradigmatic axioms of Confucian and realist theory were found to be only moderately strong measures of actual worldviews. Beliefs about the character of the international system and state behavior in it certainly include the extent to which it is seen as anarchic, zero-sum, power politics where war is likely and effective - but it is equally logical that they are also shaped by perceptions of whether the status quo system specifically seeks to marginalize China and to deny it its right to territorial integrity and sovereignty. The use of two survey versions in order to vary the state which respondents considered allowed for this to be tested. Nationalism, by nature, is based on “a common agenda for unity and identity” derived from belonging to same state . The component beliefs of nationalism and the resulting emotional content which affects their degree of influence, accordingly, are specific to the citizens of that state. The importance of shared identity is further highlighted because the relational nature of nationalism involves “explicit comparisons between highly value in-group traits and the devaluation of out-groups . As would be expected if nationalist beliefs were a significant influence on strategic decision making but were not applicable for respondents considering a foreign state, the reliability of the Views of IR latent factor – which indicated how well the indicators measured their latent factor - was notably stronger for the Chinese students thinking of other states than those thinking of their own . It was likely that the partiality of nationalism was also at least partially responsible for respondents giving substantially greater permissibility for when and how their own country ought to and can use force than for other countries. Furthermore, the way in which nationalism shapes strategic preferences and decision- making is unique to each nation because it is the differences of each nation’s characteristic beliefs that define it. Though the name implies that these are differences between traditional nation-states, China’s beliefs about its cultural history, international image, and national identity cannot be separated from its culture . This stands in strong contrast to the component beliefs of strategic culture, where the inevitability of war, the “nature” and “threat” of the “adversary,” and the “efficacy of the use of force” may come from cultural or structural sources – or both. Not only are any of these possibilities plausible but it is very difficult to determine which one was the source. The legitimacy of the postulated cultural or structural influence on what is “rational” depends upon its ability to uniquely and comprehensively explain deviations from behavior predicted by realist theory. Prior studies have little choice but rely on either structurally or culturally-specific factors for reconciliation. Because Chinese nationalism is a unique amalgamation of Chinese culture, if it is indeed the cause of at least some of the unexplained covariance, it serves as strong evidence that the respondent’s strategic preferences and decisions were more strongly influenced by cultural factors than structural ones. Moreover, if true, then nationalism, as a conveyor of strategic culture, would further homogenize elite and normal citizen’s beliefs about the use force. Lastly, it could be that the strategic preferences and foreign policy of respondents were shaped not just by nationalist beliefs but also by beliefs of Chinese exceptionalism. These concepts are closely related but differ in that exceptionalism contains the assumption that the country or culture possesses certain characteristics that make it uniquely better than all others . Especially because this concept “has long been written [about] as though exceptionalism were all of the American type or a variant of it,” it is useful to briefly compare how American and Chinese exceptionalism have been characterized . Walt describes American exceptionalism as the belief that American “values, political system, and history are unique and worthy of universal admiration” so America is “both destined and entitled to play a distinct and positive role on the world stage” . Addressing the possibility of Chinese exceptionalism, Zhang states, If by exceptionalism is meant the unique qualities — from the particular set of political and social values to the special historical trajectory and foreign relations experience — that differentiate one country from another, then China certainly has its own version of exceptionalism…because China is a rising great power, the specific character and quality of its exceptionalism matter more than those of most other countries“ Not so different than the American concept of Manifest Destiny, China’s sense of unique “greatness” derives from its large geography and population as well as its conception as the Central Kingdom, “chosen by Heaven” to be at the top of the political hierarchy, and who’s culture embodies the definition of civilization . Whereas the American version further claims that being endowed with “unique responsibilities” that are “different from other powers and that these differences require them to take on special burdens” , Zhang avers that, through “official and semi-official statements,” China’s government and elites, “having established imperial China’s pacifist tradition, emphasized China’s agonizing experience in the modern world, and professed China’s intention to never inflict similar sufferings on other countries, the PRC claims that it will always adopt a peaceful foreign policy, will never threaten anyone, and will help to maintain world peace through its own development” . Despite such pledges, much of this language is strikingly similar to Walt’s description that “American exceptionalism rest on the belief that the United States is a uniquely virtuous nation, one that loves peace...Americans like to think their country behaves much better than other states do, and certainly better than other great powers” . As it would be “at best inappropriate and at worst self-humiliating” for China to follow the Western model of great power politics , instead it emphasizes “great power reformism, benevolent pacifism, and harmonious inclusionism” as the basis of an “ethical system as the solution to the problems of the current international system” . Also aimed directly at the U.S., China further assures that its behavior as a great power is “defined by specific national interests rather than abstract principles, thus reflecting a more rational – and realistic – set of considerations…built upon a moral imperative, or virtue” . Though there are many more claims from academic literature as well as nonacademic sources extolling China’s exceptional virtue and contrasting it to America’s behavior , the pertinent issue is whether survey results found that such beliefs likely had significant influence on respondents’ preferences and decisions about the use of force. This complicated question will be briefly addressed. In a 2011 article in the American publication Foreign Affairs, the Dean of Peking University’s School of International Studies, Wang Jisi, argues that “while this [China’s] search for a “grand strategy” is still open to debate, the Chinese people are not expected to be satisfied living by the rules of the international order that were established by Western powers” . Supported by the historical evidence just discussed and China’s recent resurgence – which attests to its virtue and “unique greatness” - this attitude could have encouraged respondents to make decisions about war that marginalized international laws, norms, and general regard for other states. Yet, probably not in an appreciably different way than if strong exclusivist nationalist beliefs were the primary motive. However, Chinese exceptionalism would probably foster further indifference for immoral uses of force because its Confucian ideological foundation is used to promote the belief that China’s virtue rests on its “historical entitlement to great power status and moral authority” . Actual behavior has little impact on China’s virtue because China’s exceptionalism comes from the fact that it “had been and was now again a great power with superior moral qualities and that as such it automatically commanded a moral high ground in world affairs and deserved the respect and in some cases even…deference from other countries” . Though belief in China’s exceptionalism may be just as misguided as it has been for any other great power, more importantly, a strong argument can be made that it has not substantially shaped China’s behavior (Walt; Wang, “Myth of Chinese Exceptionalism”). As just discussed, survey results suggested that the realpolitik-like behavior generally endorsed by respondents derived more from consideration of cultural-nationalist rather than structural influences. While nationalism’s influence on perceptions and reasoning likely contributed to the strong support for behavior incongruous with Confucian ideals, it probably had little effect on respondents’ beliefs about the morality of strategic options. This was because it only codifies and formalizes the sanctioned cultural schema of political aspirations and ideology in order to give “the people a common agenda for unity and identity” . China’s beliefs about “the traits of its national [or cultural] character, its intended regional and global roles, and its perceptions of its eventual destiny,” which are strongly influenced by and consistent with Confucianism , “evolved into a nationalist and then ideological direction” . The continuity of China’s identity ensured that Chinese nationalist beliefs are the foundational basis of Chinese exceptionalism . Thus, they functionally exert similar influence on identity and unity except that the ideological component of exceptionalism also fosters the conviction that these traits prove China’s uniqueness and superiority. This makes China’s “rejuvenation” a moral imperative as well as a “national imperative” . Therefore, China’s pursuit of wealth and power - especially through coercion and force - should be seen as more moral if supported by exceptionalist beliefs than if by nationalist ones. The survey tested whether or not respondents shared similar beliefs about their cultural history, international image, and national identity but not whether these were believed to prove China’s unique superiority. Though it is unknown whether beliefs shaped by Chinese exceptionalism were any different than those shaped by just nationalism, some sense of the influence of exceptionalism beliefs can be gleaned from survey results. The overall response pattern indicating that the same uses of force were considered to be somewhat more moral for China than for other countries was consistent with such influence but the more inconsistent reasoning for those thinking about their own country suggested this was not caused by a coherent framework of beliefs. Perhaps more telling was that, contrary to the what would be expected from China’s moral imperative to reassume great power status, there was a stronger belief that China’s use of force was, overall, more “necessary but immoral” rather than moral for most situations. Further inconsistent was that moral standards were more partially biased for the straightforward scenarios rather than the more morally complex ones where the ideological conviction would most likely tip the scales in favor of one’s own country. The nuanced meanings and implications teased out of such subtle but statistically significant differences ought not be marginalized but the techniques commonly employed to cope with the limitations of human reasoning make broader assessments valuable as well. Reliance on cognitive heuristics and schemas means that perceptions and decisions should be clearly consistent and coherent with the theoretical beliefs and assumptions responsible for shaping and guiding them. Nationalist beliefs may very well have emphasized the pragmatic necessity of war but it is more difficult for a moral imperative to achieve great power status, even if done with righteous motives and the Mandate of Heaven, to overcome directly- contradictory prima facie moral principles and obligations. The strongly non-Confucian worldviews, strategic preferences, and decisions about the use of force reported in the survey results starkly contradict Chinese claims of exceptionalism based upon promises of being a “new kind of great power,” that will not play “the zero-sum game of power politics,” will engage only in “a peaceful foreign policy and will not threaten or challenge anyone,” and will promote “international cooperation and accommodation by adopting an open, tolerant, and inclusive attitude” . For example, non-Confucian beliefs and/or cognitive errors rather than rational but partial perceptions better explain why ~19% of respondents believed that using “force when it is the most effective way to pursue national interests” and knowingly killing innocent civilians by attacking cities inhabited by soldiers were morally consistent with humanness, compassion, benevolence, and harmony for all humans. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Statistical analysis of survey responses showed there to be no major problems with the reliability or validity of the stated worldviews, normative, or actual beliefs about behavior in international affairs and war. Respondents’ normative beliefs were internally consistent as well as fairly reflective of deontological ethics – certainly more so than with teleological, virtue, or Confucian thinking. This further demonstrated that the survey accurately captured respondents’ moral beliefs and that their beliefs could be reasonably well explained by established ethical theories. SEM showed that the Confucian framework of fundamental principles did not closely correspond with respondents’ stated beliefs and the relationships between them. Political realist international relations theory, though not directly tested, seemed to fit much better. At the same time, the results revealed that actual beliefs were significantly influenced by other factors as well. The point of biggest divergence between theory and measured beliefs was the relationship between the perceived character of the international system and how states should behave within it. The world was seen as anarchic, dangerous, zero-sum competition but respondents differentiated between issues that affected national security and those that did not. Observed strategic preferences were not particularly influenced by or consistent with Confucian beliefs and values. Behavior was even less constrained by them though the observed strong inclination to use force was perhaps due to the observed high sensitivity to threat. Yet, while many felt that the necessity of using force meant that states cannot be constrained by morality, this generally did not mean that morality became what was considered necessary for survival rather than what would be ideal. At the same time, the unequal moral standards between survey versions rendered many of the instances of Confucian worldviews and strategic preferences less convincing. In comparison, respondents with realist views much more consistently felt that the amorality of state behavior was equally applicable to all states. Still, respondents were generally inconsistent in their moral reasoning and strategic decision making regardless of whether they held moral or amoral beliefs. The findings reported reasonable correlation but low causation between the factors that represent the political/ethical belief systems that make up rational choice theories and the concept of strategic culture. One untested factor that likely made a significant contribution to respondents’ non-Confucian beliefs and decisions was nationalist beliefs and perceptions about China’s cultural history, international image, and national identity. Likely a product of the combination of realist assumptions about the world and the imperative for China to govern it as a Confucian regional hegemon, the findings suggest that incorporating nationalism into the strategic culture concept would improve its explanatory power. While there was some moderate evidence of the influence of Confucian beliefs on worldviews, strategic preferences and decisions, they were interpreted and applied in a way that more closely resembled justification of pragmatic pursuit of national interests than virtuous expression of Confucian ideals.