Chapter 2: Confucianism and War 
The classic Confucian texts by Confucius, Mencius, and Xunzi provide guidance for how to apply morality to political affairs with the deliberate intention of trying to convince rulers of the moral and pragmatic merit of such an approach. Recognizing that these are prescriptive ideals rather than hard rules or descriptions of how things actually are, the texts expound upon the fundamental virtues of Confucianism with a careful balance of historically- relevant specificity and timeless universality. As a result, interpretations of how Confucian beliefs should be applied to address threats can support behavior that compromises moral principles to varying degrees, conflates non-moral arguments with moral ones, and vary widely according to context, perspective, goals, politics, audience, etc. This chapter identifies the core principles of Confucianism, how they were likely intended to be applied to politics and war in an ideal world, and other ways they could plausibly be interpreted to address the more complex realities of political affairs. The goal is to identify falsifiable standards that can evaluate whether respondents are truly influenced by Confucian principles. However, the Confucian ethical system is intended to guide the development of virtuous character rather than to assess the morality of specific actions. So, unlike Just War theory’s standards of what is most “right” or what leads to the most predicted “good” , it lacks clear, falsifiable measures for determining the “best” course of action based upon motive. Therefore, the beliefs and role of morality in China’s strategic behavior can be better understood by determining the perceived morality of using force in various situations, what factors shape these beliefs, and if this affects decisions about how to respond to threats. These reveal commonly-shared assumptions, relationships, and preferences about state behavior and war which can be modeled and compared to Confucian norms. However, this is insufficient for validating how well Confucianism “fits” - or explains - actual preferences and behavior. Factors like the moral imperative for China to be at the top of the hierarchy and the highly-subjective defining role of virtuous motive make it exceptionally difficult to differentiate between behavior consistent with Confucianism but may be motivated by morality and/or self-interest. The role of morality must be further evaluated by whether moral principles are weighed, interpreted, and applied with consistency and coherence to formulate assumptions, relationships, preferences, and the permissibility of behavior. 
WHAT IS CONFUCIANISM? 
Both Chinese and non-Chinese observers of China have argued that its history and culture have fundamentally shaped its strategic culture. Scobell defines strategic culture as “the set of fundamental and enduring assumptions about the role of collective violence in human affairs and the efficacy of applying force interpreted by a country’s political and military elites” which “shapes the menu of options available to an actor in various situations as well as affects an actor’s perceptions or images of self and others”. Over the past 2000 years, Confucianism has significantly influenced China’s societal and behavioral norms – including what are the preferred methods for resolving conflicts. While other traditions such as Daoism, Mohism, Buddhism, and Legalism have, at times, supplanted Confucian thinking as the dominant philosophy within mainstream Chinese culture, Confucianism has remained relevant and most influential by adapting and then integrating aspects of these other traditions (for example, “Neo-Confucianism”). In the same way, Confucianism, Taoism, “as well as most other influential schools [of traditional Chinese thought] are creative reinterpretations” of earlier Chinese philosophies. The result is the widespread, emphatic belief in China that its society and unique strategic culture are strongly grounded in Confucianism but, while sincere, there is likely little agreement what this actually means. For example, China’s generally holistic and highly contextual approach to resolving conflicts, which includes making temporary sacrifices for long term gains, in part comes from Daoism. Similarly, Confucianism was influenced by the Daoist and Mohist belief in the power of virtuous governance and their stance to permit but strongly discourage war. The Confucian moral obligation of humanitarian interventions derives, in part, from adoption of the Mohist emphasis of “impartial love”. This is also the source for the Confucian belief in meritocracy. It is from Legalism that the “use of explicit, delimited job descriptions with pay commensurate for performance” was taken. Similarly, when Confucian noncoercive methods of promoting proper behavior fail, rulers have drawn upon Legalist heavy handed use of law and punishment to maintain harmony. Whether beliefs or recommended courses of action are overtly credited to Legalism has varied according to its reputational standing at the time but, remarkably similar to offensive realism, they still frequently appear in contemporary Chinese discussions about national security and war. The cross-referencing and cross-pollination of ideas makes it more difficult to classify which ones are “Confucian.” This means that Confucian conceptions of politics and governance “are either a watered-down version” or “a hybrid” of “existing schools of thought”. Despite this compounding the difficulty in classifying what are truly “Confucian,” numerous studies maintain that Confucian values continue to strongly define Chinese preferences for conflict resolution. Discussions about the role of Confucianism in China’s strategic culture often includes reference to The Seven Military Classics, especially Sunzi’s Art of War. These highly influential texts are considered to be the best resources for understanding China’s traditional beliefs about war but they are considered part of the distinct “military strategy school.”. They also incorporate – and combine - elements of Daoism and Legalism with Confucian beliefs. There is frequent praise of Confucian moral ideals but, as they are practical manuals for winning wars, there is strong recognition of the pragmatic compromises required due to the necessity of war. It remains unclear if the referenced moral concepts were influential in decision making or were simply instrumental for excusing immoral wars. Bearing these complexities in mind, the goal of this chapter is to examine the Confucian belief system, tracing how fundamental values can be interpreted and applied to state governance, international relations, and war. It is very likely that other belief systems influence China’s views and behavior but the requirements to rigorously validate one theory using quantitative methodology precludes the rigorous testing of others. Accordingly, discussion of non-Confucian texts is limited to passages where they provide valuable insight into the Confucian conception of war. 
THE STRUCTURE AND VALUES OF CONFUCIAN SOCIETY 
Confucianism generally holds that the greatest benefits for the most people comes from living in a social system where all members work together towards the good of the community (tianxia or “all under heaven”) rather than for one’s own self-interests. As a result, the individual’s identity and role in society are defined according to their relationships with others. Normative behavior is based upon meeting the obligations and responsibilities of that role rather than on what is protected as the rights of the individual. Since this system only works if there is strong support and widespread participation, failure to meet one’s obligations or responsibilities disrupts the efficacy of the system and so is a threat to everyone else. Thus, “conformism, collectivism, and social harmony” are existential, moral imperatives. Rooted in the belief that humans are inherently good , Confucianism asserts that the most effective way to encourage the correct behavior necessary for tianxia is through moral education and positive role models. The “moral exemplar” – or junzi – is one who embodies ren - or benevolence or humaneness - to all humans. As ren can also be defined as “overcoming one’s selfishness” , proper behavior rather than material gains or ego is the primary goal. The moral structure of the Confucian system should mean that those of higher integrity and character will naturally fill positions of authority and leadership, thus, serving as role models for ordinary citizens. Though their humaneness and benevolence towards others means that they are entrusted with greater power, this remains contingent on meeting a higher standard of selfless behavior than for those lower in the hierarchy. It is the duty of all citizens to cultivate the highest virtue of ren by following codified behavioral norms or “social ethics” known as the “rules of propriety”. Indeed, li not only provides illustrative examples of how to express right intentions as action but, by doing so, it encourages harmonious engagement with the community. The more formal connection between conceptual ideals and tangible physical acts created by li also makes it a ritualistic practice that helps internalize Confucian ideals. Proper behavior includes moral duties that are explicated according to the five relationship types considered universal to all societies - father-son, sovereign-subordinate, husband-wife, elder-younger sibling, and friend-friend. This typology codifies that “persons who assume the roles of father, elder brother, husband, elders, or ruler should make decisions in line with the principles of kindness, gentleness, righteousness, kindness, and benevolence respectively. And for those who assume the roles of son, younger brother, wife, juniors, or minister, the principles of filial piety, obedience, submission, deference, loyalty and obedience to instructions of the former group apply”. The near-universal familiarity with these dynamics and that most relationships fit fairly well within one of them makes this an effective way to promulgate social norms. The inclusion of the “sovereign-subordinate” relationship not only establishes the government as a paternal authority figure but it taps into the Confucian virtue of filial piety to foster loyalty and to provide additional moral legitimacy to the status quo hierarchy. The core Confucian principle of reciprocity, an integral part of ren, guides all relationships and moderates hierarchical disparities by emphasizing that “we should not impose on others that which we do not desire”. The moral obligation to be “universally fair and impartial to all peoples” makes it a requirement of tianxia (as “virtuous governance of all under heaven”) that policies are not negatively prejudiced based upon geography, religion, cultural, ideology, etc.. Neo-Confucianism develops this concept further by explaining that ren “may be defined in one word: impartiality, but that impartiality is a principle of Jen rather than being Jen itself, so that Jen is both altruism and love, altruism being an application of Jen, love being its function”. Though some may follow these conventions of appropriate behavior only due to social pressure, because humans are social creatures whose flourishing is connected to that of their community, the compassion for others of ren is cultivated only when the practice of li is done with yi – or sincere motive, “righteousness,” or “integrity and moral character”. For example, it is through this practice that one’s concept of filial piety or “loyalty” expands from blood relatives to encompass the community and then humankind. The nature of virtue also means that even an individual’s immoral behavior that does not harm others is still a serious offense because the negative impact it has on their character will affect their relationships and so overall wellbeing of their community. 
CONFUCIAN CONFLICT RESOLUTION 
Faith in human nature combined with the strongly compelling moral rectitude and pragmatic benefits of the Confucian system means that the instructional practice of li and the desire to act with yi is believed to be more effective at promoting a harmonious community than law. As a result, errant behavior need only be corrected through the use of shame and face. As Confucius said, “Guide them with policies and align them with punishments and the people will evade them and have no shame. Guide them with virtue and align them with li and the people will have a sense of shame and fulfill their roles.” The impossibility of entirely avoiding all disagreements means there will be disruptions to peace. However, harmony is more important than peace because it “seeks reasonable resolutions of conflicts and stable security by building truly reliable correlations of mutual benefit in the long run, as well as reciprocal acceptance of the other’s values”. When, inevitably, conflicts do arise, confrontation should be minimized as “harmony takes conflict as its primary opponent”. Maintaining harmony via positive “interpersonal relationships over strict rule of law” creates a strong preference to resolve conflicts through accommodation, compromise, and avoidance. How this should be done is further prescribed based upon which, if any, of the five types of relationships applies and the relative “intimacy/distance and superiority/inferiority” between parties. Parties of relatively equal status are both likely to accommodate, compromise, or avoid the conflict. A code of idealistic behavior based upon relationships also means that a conflict between strangers have little “collective good to consider”. While benevolence and preservation of harmony are still expected, the obligation to avoid confrontation is substantially less and even physical violence may be acceptable. The rules of propriety stipulate that seniors shall be given deference in a disagreement - regardless of what seems fair or right. The promotion and preservation of harmony is a critical consideration for proper behavior but other Confucian moral values – such as those of humaneness and righteousness - should not be compromised simply for this purpose. Yet, while the senior party should still behave in a way that demonstrates moral leadership, because seniority indicates greater virtue, it is more acceptable for them to be confrontational. Though acts that deliberately cause subordinates to lose face can reflect poorly on the senior as well , the shaming of a junior may be justified as it is not only a reprimand but also a tool to “teach a moral lesson and to motivate the individual to” respect “the rules of propriety”. The relational morality of Confucianism and the importance of right motive for ren and li means that there are few fixed rules and little accountability for how Confucian morality is interpreted and applied. Resolving disagreements based upon preserving harmony by following the rules of a rigid hierarchy rather than according to an objective standard such as equity leaves little opportunity for junior parties to seek justice. The importance of truth and who is objectively correct is further marginalized because the Confucian moral imperative to show greater benevolence/humaneness to closer relationships makes partiality and favoritism expected and acceptable. Filial piety, which serves as a model for the broader application of “love with distinctions,” reinforces the priority of close relations over even the law. Confucius establishes this in his oft-quoted response to whether a son should turn his father in to the authorities for stealing a sheep “The upright [righteous] men in my country are different from this. The father conceals the misconduct of the son and the son conceals the misconduct of the father. Uprightness [Righteousness] is to be found in this”. Hence, it is neither uncommon nor inappropriate for the weaker party to find indirect and non-confrontational ways to pursue their interests anyway. 
CONFUCIAN MODEL OF GOVERNANCE 
The roles and responsibilities for the state and its citizens are structured according to the same Confucian hierarchical model where, like the ideal family, the people and the leaders work together to support and benefit the community by fulfilling the duties designated by their position. Governing with the priority of ren, yi, and li will foster the same sense of devotion in citizens and soldiers as the “familial love and affection” between father and son. The political equivalent of the interpersonal concept of ren is renzheng (“benevolent or humane governance”). Unlike the Western individualistic system where all people have the same rights regardless of position in society, state officials in the Confucian social and professional hierarchies enjoy greater privileges but also are held to higher standards of conduct and have more weighty obligations. The idea is that if they are not concerned about their material needs then their concerns will be free to focus on the welfare of citizens rather than on their own. Their selfless virtue, which is why they occupy their positions, ensures that they will not abuse their power or privilege. The greater virtue of higher authorities provides some leeway but they still must be seen by the general population as complying with mores and norms. In fact, to encourage selfless devotion and sacrifice by government officials, Confucius emphasizes that a “noble man” dedicates himself to “a life of continuing struggle” for virtuous service regardless of reward or recognition. Some argue that this implies an additional moral obligation of the chun-tzu is to stand up for his principles even at great personal risk. Most rulers followed the Confucian practice of promoting government officials and ministers based upon virtue and competence yet it was commonplace to legitimate emperors and rulers of vassal states based upon hereditary relationships. However, the ruler’s authority still derived from holding the Mandate of Heaven – which was contingent upon him continuing to fulfill his duties. Confucian thought maintains that if the leader was “competent and moral” in his duties then the people will follow suit - while disharmony within society is due the leader failing to create a properly ordered system. Such failures, if sufficiently severe, could result in the ruler losing the Mandate, which may justify a regime change. Ensuring a harmonious environment where all people can develop ren was the ultimate goal but it was understood that this tended to require “adequate food, clothing, housing, education” as well as physical safety. The Emperor’s moral legitimacy was also based upon him being the exemplary model of Confucian behavior by using his power to benefit his people rather than to promote his own interests. The modern analog of the Mandate of Heaven in China, the “support of the people,” is still a critical consideration for the CCP. These standards conceptually helped avoid the potential for corruption from the required ruler-designated or hereditary inheritance of the Mandate and the practice of appointing “relatives to be rulers of vassal states”. The efficacy and legitimacy of this system is more difficult to determine as the narrative used ex post facto to justify most every regime change was that “each ancient dynasty was founded by a virtuous sage-king who militarily overthrew the wicked last king of the previous dynasty”. 
CONFUCIAN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND WAR 
The belief that a society and system of governance based upon Confucianism is the best way for the most people to flourish means that the Confucian normative social construct extends to how the international system should be “ordered” - or governed - and how state conflicts should be resolved. As the birthplace of Confucianism, China best embodies the virtuous behavior of Confucian governance - which legitimates its rightful place at the top of the moral and political hierarchy. Confidence in the superiority of this system means not only that foreigners would immigrate to China but, especially after experiencing the benefits of China’s benevolence to others, smaller countries will desire China’s regional leadership. Feng Zhang summarizes that, The early Ming neo-Confucian theory of foreign policy would be: the Chinese emperor, as the patriarch and ultimate authority of the world, should treat his subjects—internal ministers and peoples of the empire as well as outer vassals and peoples beyond his administrative realm—with moral excellence expressed as humaneness and grace. Humaneness is practically manifested in China’s nurturing and fostering of foreign peoples, while grace is expressed as its munificent care for their needs, both embodied in the term rou yuan () or huai rou yuan ren. The emperor should be humane by loving and nurturing the lives of all peoples with sympathy and compassion, and be gracious by being generous and tolerant towards them, so acting in accordance with the Confucian li and yi. He should try to develop integrity and trustworthiness in fulfilling these principles. Most important of all, he should always strive to cultivate his moral excellence as the ultimate means to attract the emulative submission of peoples from afar. Confucianism’s optimism about human nature means that the international system is not seen as a “fundamentally antagonistic” place. Confidence in the efficacy and rectitude of the Confucian system and in the innate inclination of humans to be moral means that ethical transgressions are often being attributed to a lack of proper understanding rather than evil intent. Especially since the inherently destructive nature of war only further disrupts harmony , the use of force is considered “inauspicious,” “to be avoided,” and a “last resort”. A more effective and more humane corrective action than forcing compliance is to provide role models and education that demonstrate the superiority of Confucian China and that encourages proper behavior. Other states were permitted to subscribe to non-Confucian systems and often to retain autonomy as long as, in accordance with the power dynamics explicated in the Confucian model, they still “show submission in return for Chinese protection” and “pay tributes” to China. These rules of propriety indicated that the international system was properly ordered and that interstate relationships were in harmony. Thus, non-Confucian states were provided with the resources that would convince them of the superiority of the Chinese Confucian model of moral governance. China’s possession of the Mandate of Heaven, its conviction of moral and cultural superiority, and its belief to be the center of the universe meant that the ruler’s authority extended to all on earth and it was his responsibility to make sure that all people enjoyed the benefits of living in a properly ordered society. As a result, there was little differentiation between internal and external threats or how they should be addressed. Immediate threats resistant to moral measures may require being countered using deterrence, accommodation, and coercion while the preferred method of long term enculturation takes effect. A similar argument for accommodation and enculturation was made when China was occupied by foreigners. Avoiding or limiting war is ideal but, when war was deemed the necessary response, as the contemporary Chinese scholar Tiewa Liu of Beijing Foreign Studies University sums, “they [Confucians] think moral principles rather than national interests should be the primary concern when launching a war”. Similarly, the most important consideration for how to use force morally is that it is done with ren and yi. Still, as Mencius states, even “using force in the name of humaneness” was immoral and qualified as hegemony. The corpus of military strategy, The Seven Military Classics, also acknowledges that the Confucian notion of a just or righteous war means that war may “sometimes be necessary” and so can be just/righteous but it “is deeply deplorable; it is bad and tragic”. That war is never fully moral implies there to be a moral remainder that closely resembles the Western notion of “dirty hands.” Lo seems to further allude to this by contrasting the Confucian view that “the prima facie wrongness of mass killing, intentional or collateral, persists in spite of being outweighed by other, weightier moral concerns” to the Western view that “[t]he morality or immorality of any use of armed force is, finally... a matter of... who uses it, why, and how”. At the same time, the greater moral consideration of context and intent attributed to Western ethics than to Confucian virtue ethics is contrary to their general characterizations. Indeed, Confucianism’s lack of “moral absolutism” and, instead, its emphasis on the specific situation, suggests that there exists no concept similar to “dirty hands”. Even if the Confucian morality of war cannot consider context, as Lo argues, the prerequisite virtue necessary for someone to occupy a position of leadership makes it highly unlikely there was the belief that “a political leader must sometimes do the wrong thing to do the right thing”. Furthermore, Confucianism did not hold there to be “two separate standards for the political and the moral, which implies the impossibility of the problem of dirty hands”. Notwithstanding the potential disagreement about the possibility of dirty hands, these preferences are consistent with Confucian pacifistic beliefs but they also could derive from other motives. The moral imperative of Confucian harmony creates little room for alternative views and beliefs. Morality that reinforces the status quo hierarchy for Confucians serves a similar purpose as the strict rules used by the Legalists. As Zhang points out, “the Confucian argument on a strong, unitary state is in line with the Legalist argument that domestic unity is the key to interstate competitiveness, a position also held by the Chinese government today”. It is difficult to determine the sincerity of moral justifications since, for example, the morality and pragmatic efficacy of using force against an occupier or a competitor state powerful enough to resist China’s demands suggests that accommodation is the better option. Similarly, the moral basis of the tributary system could incentivize wars for self-interested reasons as, at times, it led to Chinese rulers seeking to expand the number of tributary states as a testament to the “virtue and legitimacy” of their rule. The conditions that qualify for using force as “self-defense,” “defense of others,” and “only as a last resort” make it further difficult to distinguish the roles of self-interest and moral incentives. For example, the moral obligations of possessing the Mandate of Heaven includes ensuring that all people are governed according to Confucian humaneness and benevolence – which the Confucian ruler of China is most qualified to do. Tolerance for other states to use non-Confucian forms of governance is contingent on them fulfilling the rituals of the tributary system. Yet, it is a moral requirement of virtuous behavior and a necessity for self-defense that China must be the most powerful state and other states must recognize China’s moral and physical superiority by complying with its stipulated norms. This demonstrates a deep insecurity and a low tolerance for disagreements that bears notable resemblance to the goals of a regional hegemon. The intertwining of ethics and politics generates both a moral and security imperative to correct those who willfully violate Confucian norms, which includes those who don’t recognize China’s rightful place at the top of the hierarchy. If the accommodation and education provided by the tributary system does not correct and convince – or even “are likely to fail” - then war is the only remaining option to punish the stubbornly-ignorant and poor leaders, rescue the people, and correct the immoral conditions. In fact, “coercion and administrative control” to promote enculturation was often ineffective. Even if nonviolent methods are preferred, the perceived superiority, moral obligation, and pragmatic necessity of the China-led, Confucian- based domestic and regional system very easily create the conditions where the actions of others require the use of force. Just as it is immoral to permit individual behavior that is contrary to ren , Confucian texts describe the tyrannical conditions that, in some combination, require interventions, or “punitive expeditions”. They include “deprivation of peoples’ livelihood, separation of families, murder, misuse of the criminal justice system , barbaric treatment of individuals , predation or stealing people’s goods, terrorization of the population at large, and what is effectively internal chaos or anarchy”. Interventions may also be conducted “for the sole just cause of rendering criminal justice for past crimes by a tyrannical ruler or government”. Leaders or entire governments that violate Confucian virtues, rites, and practices have failed their people and proven themselves unfit to rule, so may need to be removed. This logic means that the conditions that make war just also obligate rescuing the people through nothing less than regime change. It could be argued that this is strikingly similar to classic revisionist intentions. The importance of deontological rights is not clear from the rules of interventions because the threshold conditions for tyranny focus on material issues such as “the people’s material welfare and physical security” rather than “civil and political liberties”. They don’t require or mention the obligation to provide conditions that permit or encourage the flourishing of virtuous character. Additionally, toppling a foreign government in order to uphold its “criminal law” seems disproportionate – as does the suffering and destruction inflicted from the war needed to intervene. In addition to mistreating its citizens , Confucian texts list conditions that justify corrective applications of force including when another state is experiencing political upheaval , is in violation of the rules of propriety towards China , or is experiencing most any source of disharmony. In fact, the citizens would be so grateful for China’s virtuous rule that its invading force would be welcomed as “liberators”. No different than most other ideologies, historical interpretations of Confucian views of war range from pacifist to being permissible self-defense to counter even slight violations of the China-led Confucian world order. However, a pattern of claims that punitive force is moral and necessary because most any dissent has the potential to become a highly “infectious” threat to China’s internal stability demonstrates the expansive and high degree of control China has felt it must have in order to be minimally secure. Such anxiety heightens the sensitivity to possible disruptive elements and fosters the perception that existential threats are ever present. This is further evidenced by the argument that resistance to China’s moral rectification not only represents severe “potential danger” but it also makes China’s wars against those who resist punitive in nature. According to this logic, the failure of ren and yi “to attain the desired [moral and political] objectives” proves that nonviolent, moral options are ineffective so even preventative or preemptive war may be morally justified as a tough lesson as well as a necessary, last resort for self-defense. Punitive expeditions may help align state relations but not having embraced the China- led Confucian system is also a likely indicator that the people are fundamentally “immoral, if not subhuman”. Thus, a properly-ordered status quo Confucian tributary relationship still requires China to maintain a high degree of control. The concept of “punitive expedition” is strongly coercive and the characters for it, zheng or zhengfa , reflect this as they suggest “conquest and subjugation”. Though the Confucian worldview and underlying moral reasoning is rational and may be sincere, the low threshold for war does not demonstrate strong restraint nor is it consistent with Confucian ideals. The belief that ensuring a properly ordered world and social system permits using force not only to correct improper behavior but also to deter future moral violations is a rather expansive and intolerant interpretation of Confucianism. The same moral standards of behavior and war are also not extended to other states as would be expected from Confucian principles such as reciprocity. Furthermore, deliberate or not, the conflation of the “in defense of others” and the “in self-defense” just causes of war and of its moral and pragmatic incentives also obscure the actual motives. It may be that practical incentives are provided to help convince rulers to respect moral restraints but it also makes it easier for China to justify wars to pursue its interests. The standards and reasoning for righteous wars also have striking resemblance to Legalist and realist beliefs. For example, some Confucians have admitted that not only may the use of force be justified to bring state relationships into proper order but sometimes it may even be the most effective means of doing so. Also, Legalism and Confucianism both consider war a punitive measure that should be minimized, only used with the right motives, and with measured severity. While some Confucians admit that punishments are not only important but must be appropriately severe to be effective, some Legalist authors have “recognized that appropriately severe punishments were important for maintaining order, but they also cautioned that harsh punishments prevented further violence only if the ruler refrained from using them out of anger or revenge”. Still, the ruler’s authority to engage in a war is presumably constrained because its righteousness depends upon the support of the people. Classic texts warn that self-interested reasons for war such as for “vindictive motives” , “conquest,” “profit,” or any other “personal gain” demonstrate “moral weakness” that could result in the loss of the Mandate of Heaven. On the other hand, wars with moral motives generate greater commitment to a collective effort and greater willingness to help it succeed. The importance of the support, loyalty, and obedience of the citizens, military, and ministers – even over “technical mastery of strategy, tactics, and fighting skills” at times – is explained using moral language but is also a pragmatic argument to convince leaders of the efficacy of the Confucian approach to address persistent problems of rebellious vassal states, aggressive external states, and untrustworthy bureaucrats and populace. Indeed, Xunzi saw the Qin Dynasty’s successful rise to power using Legalist principles of “proto-totalitarian social control” as a direct threat to the Confucian model and thus tried to “make the Confucian Way seem more effective, and not just more admirable”. Neo-Confucianism similarly evolved during the Song Dynasty in response to concerns about the growing influence of Buddhism. Assuring rulers of the utility of Confucian morality raises doubts that the system of beliefs actually restricts their ability to pursue self-interests. While force is considered a tool appropriate only for political purposes , even the legitimate objectives tended to be ones that specifically benefited those currently in power. That only a ruler who possessed the Mandate of Heaven had the moral authority to authorize a war and that it was not uncommon to appoint relatives to rule tributary nations presumably reduced the frequency of violent power struggles but it also made it difficult for citizens of China or tributary nations to challenge even a corrupt status quo distribution of power. The greater privilege and the supposed greater virtue of those in positions of authority restricts the ability of ordinary people to criticize, forget constrain, leaders who are trying to justify self-serving behavior that conflicts with the common good. The righteousness of using force largely depends upon motive and situational context rather than on specific rules. Yet it is not easy to disprove the veracity of stated motives, highly subjective interpretations of complex political problems, or the reasoning of what response is most virtuous. The lack of objective metrics to help determine the role of Confucian morality in the decision makes it easier for a leader to disingenuously claim or self-deceptively convince themselves of having virtuous motives. Morality is valuable in of itself because it upholds fundamental ideals of what behavior that affects others is “right” and “good” but pointing out the pragmatic benefits of Confucianism in order to make the value of applying it to real world problems more convincing does not invalidate or diminish the legitimacy of its moral component. An important distinction is which benefit is the primary motivation for its use. That is to say whether virtuous behavior is done because it is right and for the greater good or because it is profitable. The compelling moral value of Confucian thinking about war is that it promotes a humane, compassionate, and harmonious environment conducive for the development of character. This should be equally available to all or, perhaps, it is more important and more compassionate to provide to those most in need. However, the description of the properly ordered conditions best suited for promoting the moral benefits of Confucian governance in classic texts resembles regional hegemony. Though rulers should not engage in wars for personal gains, ultimately, the benefits of punitive expeditions to restore a harmonious tributary system are largely material and are unevenly distributed, favoring the Chinese people over vassal states. The moral legitimacy of interventions does consider the opinions of non-Chinese people but the metrics used are biased and self-validating. Texts argue that the success of an intervention demonstrates that it had popular approval by the citizens “rescued” from tyrannical rule and that third-party states demonstrate their support for these wars simply by the fact that China’s ruler possesses the Mandate of Heaven. Thus, the lack of outright revolt by the citizens of China and the country it attacked validates the properly virtuous motive of the China’s leader, proving that the war is moral and “an expression of legitimate rule rather than a means of establishing legitimacy”. After a punitive expedition has replaced an immoral government with a Confucian one led by a ruler loyal to China, the morality of annexing it is based upon similar metrics of “the people’s approval”. This logic conflates the moral and non-moral aspects of the efficacy of force, creating the risk that not only does “might make right” but might makes it morally right. Accordingly, virtue would be based upon power. Such a relationship between power and the use of force very closely resembles that of offensive realism. Taken at face value, guidance from the progenitors of Confucian thought provide a check on such potential abuses of power by emphasizing the overriding importance of virtuous interpretation and application of Confucian ideals. For example, Xunzi argues that it is the obligation of ministers to do what is most moral for the state and its citizens even if it requires manipulating, disobeying, or protesting their ruler to the point of banishment or execution. However, this could make it just as virtuous to manipulate the people in order to garner their support for a ruler’s decision that ministers felt benefitted the state - including to ensure society remains harmonious when a ruler makes an unpopular decision. The potential for abuse is further exacerbated because this check on power is not balanced. Even in the ideal Confucian society, the common people and common soldiers are not sufficiently virtuous to be trusted with this discretional latitude. Concerns that a political-moral hierarchy based upon subjective conceptions of virtue may create conditions ripe for abuse are not unfounded. Though it is not clear who was really manipulating ideology for self-interest, it was claimed that the use of Confucian morality by rulers of vassal states to justify wars of “aggression and tyranny” led to both Mencius and Xunzi emphasizing the limited authority to authorize war. It is similarly due to the recognized potential to “dogmatize” and use Confucianism’s strict definitions of morality as purely “utilitarian calculation” that Daoism rejects virtues like ren. Bearing in mind that Legalism was a competing ideology during the Warring States Period, the seminal Legalist Shang Yang rejected Confucian moral restrictions as merely “opportune” and “expedient”. In fact, instances in China’s history where Confucian morality has been used or manipulated to acquire greater power or territory, legitimate the authority of rebel leaders, or justify immoral wars for other self-interests – including in the Han, Qin, Ming, Northern and Southern, Zhou, and other Dynasties – are so numerous that this practice has been described as “commonplace in imperial China”. More contemporary examples of likely manipulation include Mao’s moral justifications for the use of force which claimed legitimate just causes ranging from only by “oppressed people united to fight against the oppressors” to “establishment of perpetual peace” to “inducing progress”. Modern PLA writings assert that just wars are ones that “promote the fundamental interests of the people and advance social progress”. The examples given include “the oppressed and exploited peoples’ fight for liberation, colonized countries’ fight for independence and against international oppression, and sovereign nations’ fight against aggression” while the “sources of unjust wars in the modern era are imperialism and hegemony”. Internal stability seems to be included as a just cause as demonstrated by the heavy-handed use of the PLA to deal with more recent incidences of domestic unrest. The continued influence of Confucianism can be seen in how the provocative claim of a 1958 Manifesto by the “New Confucians” that “the West misunderstood Chinese culture and values, necessitating action by China to claim its rightful place in world affairs” has stoked the intensity of China’s political-ideological clashes with the West over the past fifty-plus years. Though the Confucian worldview continues to influence China’s foreign policy goals, the constraints of the contemporary international system have tempered China’s use of force as a corrective measure. Yet, citing Xunzi’s quote, “The humane man uses his state not just to maintain what he already possesses and nothing more; instead, he will unite people,” Stalnaker prognosticates that, “since, by definition, a hegemonic power is far from perfect, it could and should be supplanted by any state that could do a better job, by its leaders’ own lights. It is easy to imagine contemporary Chinese leaders viewing the United States in just this light, as a flawed hegemon worthy of being supplanted”. 
CONFUCIAN BEHAVIOR IN WAR 
“Chi K'ang asked Confucius about government, saying, "What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the good of the principled?" Confucius replied, "Sir, in carrying on your government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced desires be for what is good, and the people will be good. The relation between superiors and inferiors is like that between the wind and the grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows across it." Although Confucianism can be interpreted to permit force in self-defense and to “remove tyranny” even The Seven Military Classics specifically state that wars are still expected to be fought in a moral way that minimizes suffering and destruction. The strong distaste for violence clearly shown in Confucian primary texts mean that state behavior should show an obvious inclination for holistic stratagems to defensively deter and coerce when avoidance, compromise, and accommodation are not viable options. Similar to the Just War theory principles of last resort, proportionality, and discrimination, there should be a high threshold for what severity of threat warrants the use force and, even when absolutely necessary, there is still a preference for “minimal violence and defensive wars of maneuver or attrition”. Because, as Turner says, “by Han times, the good ruler was defined in part as one who could control violence” , force was generally used to achieve specific, narrow political goals once the situation has been molded so that the probability of victory was high. Accordingly, the stratagems laid out in The Seven Military Classics ideally deter and coerce but also prepare the battlefield before the application of actual force. The assertion that the use of such tactics is based upon the assumed inevitability of war rather than as a viable alternative to it is supported by lines in The Seven Military Classics such as, ““When these twelve measures are fully employed, the conditions are ready for military actions to accomplish the goal...When the signs are favorable to us, attack the enemy”. Such “dual use” tactics include strengthening alliances while trying to divide those of the opponent as well as creating positive and negative diplomatic, economic, and psychological effects as well as symbolic confrontations to convey intent, to test the opponents resolve, to understand the enemy’s plans, and to identify points of weakness. The Confucian predilection for limited war means that once conditions are optimal, there should be targeted application of force intended to quickly lead to negotiations that achieve specific, narrow political goals rather than full-scale, open-ended warfare. Confucian texts provide a number of illustrative recommendations for how and why this is done. For one, a characteristic of a skilled General is that he keeps the scale of the war limited so that he retains the ability to create and control conditions to be most favorable for victory. Additionally, since the intent of a just war is to punish the leader and correct the state for violating Confucian norms , the effects should be directed towards the guilty leaders and minimized for captured, surrendered, and fleeing combatants as well as for innocent civilians. Chinese soldiers, accordingly, should refrain from activities like destroying crops, plundering, taking unnecessary prisoners, or harming/killing innocent civilians – especially the young and the elderly. Once the war is won, the victorious party should consult the people when appointing a new ruler and refrain from imposing heavy demands or compliance with their cultural norms until there had been sufficient time to convince the occupied people that this regime change was beneficial. Limited wars also help minimize the disruptive impact on China’s domestic stability. For example, since the Chinese army was mostly conscripted peasants, Confucianism advises that wars should not be conducted during planting and harvesting times nor should they last longer than “a single season”. The moral benefits of reducing the suffering and destruction for both China and its opponent through restricting the scale of violent conflict just discussed are consistent with Confucian ideals. These guidelines also have significant similarities to the jus in bello principles of proportionality and discrimination. Also like Just War theory, the Confucian preference to limit the scale and violent tactics of conflicts reflects holistic and long-term consideration of pragmatic efficacy. One notable difference, though, is that those who advocate for JWT tend to focus on the reduction of harm and suffering as the primary goal while Confucian texts argue for constraint by emphasizing how doing so will help China’s wars achieve their intended political goals. Another example is that Twiss and Chan support their assertion that there are both moral and pragmatic benefits to “limiting damage to soldiers and civilians alike, and on both sides of a conflict” by referencing Xunzi’s statement, When others defend the ramparts of their cities and send out knights to do battle with me and I overcome them through superior power, then the number of casualties among their population is necessarily very great. Where casualties have been extreme, the population is bound to hate me with vehemence... then each day their desire to fight against me will grow [Also] the number of casualties among my own population is certain to be very great... [if so] they are certain to have a fierce dislike for me then each day they will have less desire to fight for me so as others grow willing to fight, my own people will grow less willing to defend me. In this way the cause of my former strength is reversed.. The passages from The Seven Military Classics that Lo points to as evidence of in bello moral constraint further demonstrate how the morality of constrained warfare helps China achieve political ends. For example, Master Wu’s Art of War proposes that minimizing the harm to noncombatants differentiates a righteous and unrighteous army because it demonstrates the virtuous intent of “suppressing the violently perverse and rescuing the people from chaos”. The pragmatic benefit of such behavior is that it “will show the populace that you do not harbor vicious intentions”. The text concludes its support for constrained warfare by making the moral argument that “when they had executed the guilty, the king, together with the feudal lords, corrected and rectified [the government and customs] of the state. They raised up the Worthy, established an enlightened ruler, and corrected and restored their feudal position and obligations”. Certainly, concern for innocent, oppressed people reflects humaneness and compassion but these guides for military strategy clearly show that the end goal is that the rescued population doesn’t revolt. A complacent population morally legitimates as well as creates the practical conditions for annexation or at least a properly ordered tributary relationship. As previously discussed, the moral reasoning for tianxia may be sincere but it benefits China more than vassal states. Many of the cited passages directly or indirectly reference yi and ren to add a moral component to the benefits of restraint for achieving political goals. Lo concludes from them that there was seen to be both pragmatic and moral advantages to limiting behavior in war but he spends little time addressing their relative importance. For example, he recounts recommended restrictions and follows them with statements such as “Besides, as the goal of such a military campaign is to rectify wrongdoing and to restore proper order, such discreet conduct is needed to help reach this political goal,” “Hence restraining oneself from barbarity in the conduct of war is also for a political purpose, namely to win the hearts and minds of the populace so that order may be promptly restored post bellum,” and “in The Seven Military Classics the concern for noncombatants during war has both a moral and a political dimension; both are indispensable”. Twiss and Chan do briefly discuss how the limits in war could be for deontological moral reasons or as a pragmatic military strategy to win “the hearts and minds of enemy forces and their civilian populations”. They conclude that both may be operable but the professed moral motives are sincere because they are consistent with both Mencius and Xunzi’s deontological belief that the only acceptable political goals for a righteous war are to promote the good for all people. While the moral duty to avoid unnecessary harm – especially to civilians – is consistent with an end goal of bringing about a greater good, it is not sufficient proof to claim, as they do, that this refutes Johnston’s analysis that Confucian texts indicate no jus in bello constraints as “in a righteous war the ends justify the means”. They discuss several other passages by Mencius which more convincingly demonstrate principled condemnation of killing innocents but notably do not address the concept of in bello proportionality. This is consistent with other Confucian texts which advise that once the use of force is deemed just and the environment had been cultivated to strongly favor China, targeted but decisive force should be used to ensure victory. Decisive force in this context means maximizing the odds at strategic points rather than launching large invasions but also implies aggressive use of overwhelming military power. The lack of principled objection to unnecessary, excessive harm in war is further evidenced by the fact that, contrary to deontological priorities, “the disproportionate use of some weapons is not explicitly prohibited in The Seven Military Classics”. One of the historical examples cited to support the Confucian emphasis on not harming innocents is when one ruler’s army killed an innocent boy and stole his food supplies, the other ruler sent his army “to punish Ge” for the offense. As Twiss and Chan point out, the moral of this story centers on the deontological offenses of theft and plunder. However, claiming that it promotes noncombatant immunity is more of a stretch as the anecdote talks about starting a righteous punitive war rather than what is morally acceptable behavior in war. It also echoes the relative unimportance of the teleological principles of last resort and proportionality seen in other Confucian texts. Furthermore, these passages are still rife with implied destruction. For example, the previously discussed admonition to spare the general population in order to prove there are no “vicious intentions” starts with “Now as to the Way [Dao] for attacking the enemy and besiege his cities: After his cities and towns have already been shattered, enter each of the palaces, take control of their bureaucrats, and collect their implements [of administration]”. There is little discrimination between civilian and military targets if cities and towns are “shattered” and such destruction seems disproportionate and unnecessary. Yet the passage and Lo’s analysis of it seem to assume that the siege and devastation of the city are such a given that they don’t address it when citing the passage in support of in bello constraints. The role of Confucian ethics is further revealed by how ren and yi are applied to the normative discussions about wars of self-defense. Some Western scholars contend that states, as political constructs, do not possess the same right of self-defense as humans as state sovereignty does not justify violating a human’s right to life the way that a human’s right to life and liberty does. This is a particularly relevant criticism because Confucian standards of legitimate government and virtuous behavior render the preservation of the government even less worth the harms of war. Weak states are a sign of illegitimate rule so, at some point, as Confucius states, it is more humane and just for the “corrupt” ruler and government to surrender or flee than to continue fighting. However, this reasoning is not mentioned in recorded debates about China’s wars except as an ex post facto justification of regime changes. Instead, the morality of continuing wars of diminishing chances of victory discuss the efficacy of achieving political goals rather than on humane, harmonious well-being of the people. Discouraging wanton killing is much less politically controversial than suggesting to a ruler that he should abdicate or even refrain from using advantageous but destructive tactics. Indeed, objectionable acts like harming captured enemy soldiers and civilians, destroying crops, plundering, and imposing heavy demands after victory offer little advantage for winning the battle or war but they would create additional resentment and resistance once the enemy was defeated. The multiple indications that Confucian guidance makes little effort, overall, to limit the primacy of military efficacy means that it is unclear how well Confucian constraints would hold up when they conflict with it. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF CONFUCIAN MORALITY 
There is no consensus about which of the three models of Western ethics best describes Confucianism. Virtue ethics center on the actor rather than on the act but the best expression of character still involves weighing the relative desirability of the possible options. The righteousness of using force is based on when it is more humane and compassionate to do harm in order to bring about a greater good. This is done by considering what is “right” according to deontological moral duties, what is “good” according to teleological ends, or some combination of the two. Therefore, virtue ethics involves teleological and/or deontological considerations that can be examined to gain insight into the virtue of underlying motives. Some argue that it is a virtue ethic because it considers more than whether moral rules and principles are followed and because it places the “primacy of virtue over right action and the maximization of goods”. Proper motive is more important than “the best overall outcome or the inherent rightness of certain actions irrespective of consequences”. However, other scholars point out the portions of classic Confucian texts that advise the best way to determine what is morally right is to consider the consequences. The relative value of possible consequences is evaluated according to whether proposed actions are expected to foster a harmonious environment. This is the desired goal, measured according to the action’s promotion of ren, yi, and li, because it benefits everyone within the community. Those same motives and goals are used by others to counter that Confucianism is, ultimately, deontological because consideration of consequences inevitably becomes a matter of self-interest. As Tiwald says, “teleology and deontology exhaust the range of possible moral theories, and that deontology is distinguished from teleology by the fact that it ultimately grounds ethical claims in moral as opposed to non-moral goods”. A counter-argument is that Confucianism is not deontological because rights are not absolute. It only protects an individual’s rights if used “to promote the ethical life or ren” - individuals have the “freedom to choose the good” but not the freedom to choose “the bad”. Additionally, the reasons ministers and Generals should disobey their rulers mentioned above is based upon moral decision making where “the good outcomes justify ignoring or directly thwarting” immoral orders from the ruler. Still others say that Confucianism does not fit any of these types, especially virtue ethics, because what is virtuous should be universally applicable, not variable based upon contextual roles and relationships. This is discussed in greater detail below. It may not be possible to parse Confucianism into either deontological or teleological ethics but, at a minimum, it can be said that motive is a crucial determinant. The morality of behavior according to virtue ethics is measured by whether it promotes development of character qua human flourishing. At the same time, virtue cannot be based only upon simply achieving this; positive results achieved immorally are still immoral. Still, Confucianism has “a broadly consequentialist structure – specific ways of conduct or policies are moral if, when put into practice, they promote the world’s welfare, and immoral if they harm the world”. In other words, since “the only way to do what is right is to work for the good , and the only way to work for the good is to accord with what is right ,” immoral results demonstrate that the motive for the behavior was wrong. There are sufficient usable standards for measuring results as “the relevant notion of welfare is explained in the text in terms of a plurality of specific goods, some of which are social or collective in nature. These goods include: peace and security, social harmony, care of the infirm and disadvantaged, fair treatment of the weak at the hands of the strong, political order, a thriving population, and material prosperity understood mainly in terms of people having sufficient food, clothing, and rest.” Turning more specifically to Confucian moral reasoning about war. The importance of minimizing the use of force depends upon whether it derives from deontological factors discussed by Twiss and Chan, utilitarian ethical thinking as Lo claims, or Johnston’s amoral efficacy. Calculating how best to express virtues such as ren should consider the means and predicted results. The priority of maintaining a properly ordered and harmonious environment is consistent with both teleological and deontological thinking. Evidence of deontological priorities includes that wars are justified based upon right intentions for a just cause and can be authorized by only the legitimate authority. Also, the required consent of the people is based on the Kantian rights of all humans to not be used as a means to an end. Confucianism also states that there is a greater moral obligation for even Generals and other officers to die loyally carrying out their orders – as is their duty - than for them to win a battle. At the same time, all the teleological-based jus ad bellum factors are found in traditional Chinese thinking about war though “last resort” has a more overt role than “proportionality” or “reasonable chance of success”. However, the JWT principle of “last resort” comes from teleological reasoning but the Confucian version derives from the deontological belief that “military lethal violence is morally problematic”. The decision to use force rather than accommodation is predicated on not just whether there is a reasonable chance of success if used but also by weighing the harms from the existing threat to those from a war that eliminates it. Mencius suggests that the ruler should use the same teleological calculus to decide whether his abdication to allow for the opposition’s peaceful transition of power would be a greater good for his people. As Lo summarizes, “to resort to war is a moral “expediency,” that is, a temporary deviation from the norms, and so is an alien work, not the proper work, of cardinal virtues. This alien work still has to be restrained by the proper work, and hence the emphasis of last resort and in bello norms”. A value system that prioritizes the good of the community over protecting the rights of individuals is more consistent with a preference for a faster but less restrained war than for a longer but more constrained war. The greatest number of people benefit the most by quickly restoring a Confucian-based harmonious social system even if this means more combatants die. Such priorities are consistent with the belief that “the ends clearly justify the means”. As this makes efficacy a primary concern, the teleological moral advantages generally outweigh the deontological immoral harms of using escalatory force to quickly resolve conflicts and restore harmony. The corresponding increased suffering and destruction can be further justified by the fact that additional force is a teleologic proportional punitive measure necessary for those who otherwise refuse to correct their immoral behavior. The practice of dehumanizing those who do not accept the China-led Confucian system makes these harms even more acceptable. The jus post bellum freeing of captured enemy combatants and replacing the tyrannical rule of an offending state with Confucian leaders rather than punishing them for their resistance also reflects teleological rather than deontological calculations. As does the discrimination between punishing innocent citizens and the offending soldiers and government. Thus, while conceptual limitations exist - especially for civilians - they derive more from weighing the expected consequences than from ensuring the most humane treatment possible during war. Confucian views of war further weaken the normative restrictions towards enemy combatants. Beliefs that any use of force is undesirable, that it is a failure to find preferable alternative methods to resolve the conflict, that it should only be used once victory is assured, and that it is used to punish inferiors means that there is neither “honor nor glory” being a soldier. Since the concept of occupational professionalism, accordingly, never developed, there was neither strong incentives nor role models to encourage moral behavior from the undisciplined peasant-citizens who did most of the fighting. The moral partiality of the Confucian social structure, which mandates greater loyalty and concern to those with whom there is a closer relationship, means that the enemy – especially “barbarian” fighters - are given even less consideration. Although reciprocity is a fundamental Confucian value, the lack of respect for professional conduct or the enemy means that, unlike in the West, it is not an important consideration in the conduct of war. Thus, unlike JWT, it did not create a moral objection to Sun Zi’s advice that “unorthodox tactics” such as deception, manipulation, sabotage, ruses, and other exploitative measures are not only a fundamental part of conflict but a sign of intelligence. However, this is contradictory to the deontological reasoning for reciprocity - that moral prohibitions are prima facie so its applicability is not affected by the character or behavior of the opponent. This further suggests that Confucian thinking about war is largely based upon consideration of efficacy and the “ends.” It could be argued that, strictly speaking, Confucian views of war have few obvious deontological prohibitions because there are no specific protections afforded to all humans that should never be violated - regardless of the negative consequences of doing so. The texts consistently advocate for constrained war by citing the beneficial results from doing so; there is virtually no reference to deontological “absolutist ethic” such as human rights “for utilitarian values to contradict”. In other words, debates about virtuous governance do not argue against teleological-based behavior based upon the fact that it contradicts prima facie, absolute, and universally applicable deontological priorities. 
MORALITY AND AMORALITY 
The requirement of virtue ethics that actions are both good and right makes it difficult to rank their importance but, as discussed above, immoral results demonstrate that the motive for the behavior was wrong. Yet, differentiating between moral and amoral motives for achieving the “best” ends is more difficult than identifying the comparative importance of means and ends but essentially centers on concern for “The Other.” The moral component of determining what is “right” or “good” requires that the decision is both objective and impartial. What is moral for one person should be moral for any other person in the same situation – regardless of who benefits from it. This standard is recognized in both ancient and modern Chinese thinking. For example, Sun Zi says that a good leader is one who easily wins, “hence his victories bring him neither reputation for wisdom nor credit for courage”. This emphasis on consequences over deontological protections recognizes that virtuous behavior in war includes some kind of fairness but that wars should not be fought fairly. In fact, Sun Zi’s emphasis on deception and utility are cited as reasons why some Confucians have “denounced” The Art of War “on moral grounds” since at least 206 BCE. It also suggests that the observed preference to consider the consequences of war is motivated by amoral pragmatism rather than moral ideals. Lo’s examination of Mao and PLA writings provides further evidence of this. For example, a PLA General has argued that China’s official strategy of active defense could consider a state that “offends” China’s “fundamental interests” as an “attack” that justifies force as an appropriate response in self-defense. He then states that, right or wrong, the appearance of acting in self-defense makes a war seem just and, thus, helps create domestic and international support. Lo also finds that Mao and PLA views of war largely derive from interpreting Sun Zi’s Art of War based upon its amoral “usefulness”. In particular, Confucian ethics is referenced only to establish that the morality of war is based upon just cause – there is no substantial discussion about what constitutes proper conduct in war. Thus, “for an amoralist, once war has started, there is no concern for “excessive” force and hence no need for self-imposed restraint”. This has generated concern that the CCP is simply seeking to strengthen its legitimacy and justify its behavior by resurrecting a convenient interpretation of China’s Confucian “strategic culture narrative” and perpetuating it through holistic repetition of media, political and military leaders, and academics. Pointing to recent state- sanctioned writings, Lo similarly concludes that “As no ius in bello component from The Seven Military Classics is inherited, the term “just war” is sadly employed very much for the same purpose as the phrase “just army” was employed in imperial China, namely for legitimation and propaganda”. Thus, China’s interpretation is intentionally shaped so that “all wars China may have to fight in the future will be forced upon her, for example, when territorial integrity, sea border rights, and national unification are under serious threat. Such wars will be just and defensive wars, and will be fought with no other choice”. Mearsheimer makes similar comments about China’s efforts to re-appropriate Confucian ethics of war, Of course, this justification for war is remarkably pliable. As almost every student of international politics knows, political leaders and policy-makers of all persuasions are skilled in figuring out clever ways of defining a rival country’s behavior as unjust or morally depraved. Hence, with the right spinmeister, Confucian rhetoric can be used to justify aggressive as well as defensive behavior. Like liberalism in the United States, Confucianism makes it easy for Chinese leaders to speak like idealists and act like realists.” 
CONCLUSIONS 
Confucian normative behavior and preferences for conflict resolution, from the family level to interstate relations, prioritize maintaining a harmonious environment ideal for the development of virtuous character. Behaving with ren and li are based upon virtuous motives - which is highly subjective, contextual, and dictated by one’s place in the familial-structured hierarchy. The presumed greater virtue of those in positions of authority and their corresponding obligation to serve as role models self-validates the rectitude of their decisions and makes their leadership a moral imperative. It also morally mandates that China maintains harmony so any potential threat to its tributary system is seen as severe and existential. Confucian texts and China’s historical debates about war reflect the greater consideration of harmonious “ends” over “means” that insist upon upholding universal protections. So, despite pacifistic ideals and the importance of just cause, legitimate authority, last resort, and other moral considerations similar to those of Just War theory, aggressive corrective military actions are accordingly seen as clear self- defense, as necessary for ensuring a harmonious environment for the benefit of all people, and as an educational and punitive obligation. Yet, Confucianism can be “conceptualized liberally in terms of benevolence, reciprocity, and other humanistic values, or illiberally in terms of conformity, duty, and other authoritarian values”. It is also hard to tell whether behavior is truly considered virtuous or excused using that language but really seen as amorally necessary as these beliefs and behaviors are also consistent with Legalist, offensive realist, and regional hegemonic assumptions and preferences. The need to convince rulers that moral restraint is practical as well as moral method to address threats to the state further conflate morality and efficacy. The primary difference is whether or not the decision was objective and impartial. The Confucian emphasis on virtue centers on the actor rather than the act and, thus, motive is the defining factor when deciding the best course of action. With virtuous motive, behavior will be both “good” and “right.” Conversely, acts that either commit a moral wrong or have morally bad results indicate that the motives were not virtuous. Thus, ambiguities due to the difficulty of determining the veracity of stated motive and of its claimed virtue can be clarified by examining the selected option for state security using the metrics of impartiality, objectivity, goodness, and rightness. Having explored the principles of Confucianism and how they can be interpreted to define Confucian beliefs about war, the next chapter looks at how prior studies have compared Confucian beliefs to China’s historical behavior. Particular attention is given to their methods of addressing the complexities and ambiguities discussed here as well as how this study can do so in new, insightful ways. 