CHINESE VIEWS OF THE ROLE OF MORALITY IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND THE USE OF FORCE 
By Lukas Filler 
ABSTRACT
This study quantitatively tested whether the strategic preferences of China’s future decision makers are consistent with non-coercive Confucian values. Students at six elite Chinese universities were surveyed to identify beliefs about the character of the international system, when and how it is permissible to use force, and whether morality should constrain state behavior. Structural Equation Modeling was used to characterize and validate stated beliefs, strategic preferences, and moral reasoning as well as to determine the extent to which they reflected the theoretical Confucian system of values and conception of moral governance. Respondents’ perception of a dangerous, zero-sum, conflict-prone international system was not consistent with a Confucian worldview. Neither was their strong proclivity to use force to counter most any potential threat or when in the state’s best overall interests. There was substantial concern for noncombatants and the intentionality of harming them influenced the morality of doing so. However, moral ideals did not strongly constrain behavior. At the same time, such exceptional necessity also did not tend to make immoral behavior moral. There was also a consistent, strong bias to hold foreign states to higher standards of behavior and morality than the respondents’ own state. The results also showed that the framework of related issues which define and differentiate major IR theories only explained a small portion of respondents’ beliefs about the international system, state behavior, and the role of morality in them. It is likely that respondents’ reasoning about these issues were also influenced by nationalistic beliefs which combined Confucian and political realist ideologies. 
Chapter 1: Introduction
BACKGROUND 
China’s rapid economic development has been accompanied by greater power and influence in regional and international affairs. It’s rapid military modernization, increasingly coercive behavior, and frequent criticism of and disregard for the current, Western values- based international system signal the potential for dramatic changes to the status quo. China’s intentional obfuscation of its goals and how it intends to achieve them further increases anxiety about what kind of threat it represents. The role of force in China’s pursuit of state interests and security strongly depends upon its perceived efficacy, necessity, and perhaps morality. Political realist IR theory is based upon the assumption that the world is anarchic, zero-sum competition for survival and that states are “rational unitary actors” who seek to maximize power. As a result, state security depends upon pursuit of national interests - and states cannot afford to be constrained by morality. Confucian ideals are inconsistent with such goals and uses of coercion and force because they are believed to be counter to and ineffective at fostering a world based upon core ethical principles like compassion, harmony, benevolence, and reciprocity. The logical connection between views of international relations, the priorities of the state, and how they ought to be pursued allows for comparing stated beliefs about war to those about the character of the international system – and these to the normative ideals of the Confucian paradigm – to test the validity and legitimacy of professed values.
PROBLEM 
The evolution of Western morality and international laws about war has been shaped by its religious, philosophical, and political history. China’s beliefs about war may be dramatically different as they were shaped by its own, distinctive culture and history. Indeed, China claims that its goals and behavior have always been guided by its unique Confucian-based culture - which emphasizes pacifistic non-coercive values such as compassion, benevolence and humaneness. Yet, a substantial number of scholars have found that China’s historical use of force appears to contradict these professed preferences. Rather than being constrained by Confucian morality, it has been employed whenever and however considered effective for countering threats. Indeed, studies have found there to be a proclivity to counter even minor potential threats with offensive force rather than through less coercive means such as accommodation and compromise. One reason may be that, perhaps due to a long history of frequent conflicts with other states, Chinese leaders and advisers generally have held strong realist views of the international system - one of anarchy, zero-sum competition, and inevitable war. In response to concerns about China’s recent, rapid development and, at times, coercive use of economic and military strength to pursue state interests, a new national strategy was developed. The core idea, that China will always adhere to a “developmental road of peaceful rise,” is a clear reference to its Confucian heritage. Though many of the examples cited in support of this assertion have been criticized as misleading or false, China points to its “non-alignment” during the Cold War, its generous sharing of economic prosperity with other states that, unlike the US, does not come with interventionist political requirements, its traumatic experiences for a hundred years after the Opium Wars, and the supposedly peaceful trading explorations of Zheng He as examples of its nonaggressive preferences. In an official speech, Premier Wen Jiabao expanded on the “five essentials” for China’s peaceful rise to include “1. taking advantage of world peace to promote China’s development and safeguarding world peace through China’s development; 2. It would be based on China’s own strength and independent hard work; 3. It could not be achieved without continuing the “opening-up policy” and an active set of international trade and economic exchanges; 4. It would take several generations; and 5. It would “not stand in the way of any other country or pose a threat to any other country, or be achieved at the expense of any particular nation.”. The “peaceful rise” also involves further “opening up” through mutually- beneficial globalization and economic development that shuns expansionism, oppressing others, and any other hegemonic, destabilizing behaviors. The concept, renamed “peaceful development,” has continued to receive official endorsement in both formal and informal mediums. For example, President Xi Jinping in a recent speech credited Confucianism as the “Chinese traditional culture” which is the primary source for the values which guide its soft power, governance, relations, and development ("China Commemorates Confucius with High-Profile Ceremony"). Accordingly, China not only seeks to foster a more harmonious society and world but prefers to do so through nonaggressive, non-expansionist, and peaceful domestic and foreign policies that reflect and promote these values. As a result, China will continue to resolve disagreements through accommodation, compromise and other nonviolent means whenever possible. The immorality and inefficacy of coercion means that force will only be used to counter the most extreme threats and, even then, will be limited and defensive. Yet, the “peaceful rise” and “development” strategies have received strong criticisms by Chinese as well as non-Chinese scholars. Two Chinese concerns are that this strategy signals a lack of resolve and also will constrain China’s options to deter Taiwan independence and other territorial disputes. Other concerns include that the “external security environment” make it impossible for China’s peaceful rise; that it is too soon to claim China’s peaceful ascendancy so confidently; that it is not in harmony with President Deng’s strategy for China to “bide its time and hide its capabilities;” that it would inhibit military modernization and so weaken China; and that it could “incite domestic nationalism and create political problems.”. The concept has evolved over time and caveats have been added to address some concerns. For example, to counter the possibility that other states see this as an exploitable opportunity, it has been emphasized that China’s peaceful, win-win strategy is contingent on the behavior of other states. A PhD researcher at a Chinese Communist Party think tank states, Chinese President Xi Jinping has repeatedly stressed that China will stick to the road of peaceful development, but will never give up its legitimate rights and will never sacrifice its national core interests. He also noted that no country should presume that China will engage in trade involving the core interests or that China will swallow the “bitter fruit” of harming its sovereignty, security or development interests. From this perspective, the related countries should not underestimate China’s determination and willpower to safeguard the core national interests. Though worded defensively, some may see this as further evidence of thinly-veiled offensive realist views. Especially when directly supported by senior official government statements that there is a direct “dialectical relationship between peaceful development and China’s protection of national interests. As China’s peaceful development progresses, it will have more resources and measures to protect its national interests and become increasingly proactive in doing so. China will neither sacrifice other countries’ interests to achieve its own development, nor will it allow other countries to encroach upon China’s legitimate rights and interests”. Frequent inconsistencies between China’s patterns of behavior and its professed moral principles cause many to believe that moral language is used symbolically to legitimate the realist decision to use force. Other scholars disagree, arguing that Confucian preferences exist but a highly conflict-prone realist view of the international system amplifies the severity of threats to state security, allowing for nearly anything to meet the moral threshold of last resort in self-defense. It is also possible morality is an important factor that shapes preferences but is often disregarded out of perceived necessity due to exceptional circumstances. That the behaviors and justifications for each of these possible interpretations are mostly indistinguishable to the outside observer makes it difficult to use them to determine strategic preferences or the role of morality. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Prior studies have sought to answer these questions by measuring whether political realist or Confucian beliefs best explain China’s strategic preferences, as derived from the past statements and behavior of China’s military, political, and academic elites.1 However, this approach is controversial as the dearth of relevant data means that these studies rely heavily on inference to identify beliefs, biases, motives, and other causal factors – making educated assumptions from public behavior and the limited statements and texts available to scholars. The primary metric used in this study – “whether morality constrains selfish behavior” – reflects a fundamental disagreement in IR about whether “norms shape interests”. As Herrmann states, “link[ing] this theoretical debate to evidence is complicated. It requires identifying what a state would do if it were motivated by material concerns that is different from what it would do if it were motivated by normative ideas”. It is easier and more accurate to do this by directly measuring beliefs and then using the relationships between them to characterize the decision-making process than by looking at past behavior and trying to determine which motive was responsible for it. Without a sufficient range of primary sources to provide critical context and balance, the standards used to evaluate case studies must be quite general. For example, it is often necessary but too reductive to define Confucianism as a strict interpretation of pacifism where most any use of force is evidence of its lack of influence. Instead, like modern Christian ethics, a more nuanced position of strongly eschewing the use of force is a more reasonable standard. It is similarly misleading to consider any violation of the moral obligation to not do harm as sufficient proof that morality was irrelevant in the decision because the use of force inherently violates one moral principle to uphold another. The morality of this decision depends upon what ethical theory was used to weigh overall moral value of the options – what “ought” to be done. The three major normative theories – deontological, teleological, and virtue ethics – differently measure what is the ultimate good to evaluate whether a potential act does more harm or good. Very briefly, deontological ethics holds that the highest moral good is “good will” – the intent to uphold moral duties, rules, and rights - as only it is both intrinsic (“good in itself”) and unqualified. Thus, an act is moral if it does what is “right.” That is to say whether, regardless of consequences, it upholds the universal rights of and duties to others. People are to be always treated “as ends and never as means” and rules are upheld for their intrinsic value not out of fear of punishment. Some believe that this emphasis means that there is a moral difference between intending to do harm and allowing an act to do harm as a side effect of the greater good (the “Doctrine of Double Effect” or “DDE”). Recognition that this approach may involve conflicting duties leads some to argue that these duties are “prima facie”. That upholding specific moral rules may not always bring about the highest good has led to the idea of “threshold deontology,” where, at some point “the consequences become so dire” that it is more moral to prioritize the best outcomes instead. Teleological ethics (interchangeably referred to as “consequentialist ethics”) base the morality of an act upon the net sum of all its intentional causes - anticipated and/or actual. The consequences that can be considered must be consistent but can be those from specific acts, of upholding moral rules, the “utility” of the act to bring about the most good to the most people, and many other desired ends. “Good” results are more important than “right” action however there is potential for abuse as this also establishes that numerous “ends justify the means”. Though are a number of different ways to measure what is “good,” the moral content of the act must be objective and impartial – it cannot vary based upon who does it or benefits from it. As with deontological ethics, it is widely recognized that there are circumstances – especially in war – where morality ought not be based upon the good outcome alone as the accompanying violation of moral rights/duties is too egregious. Virtue ethics holds that the highest good is neither the best results for the most people nor the upholding of universal rights and duties but, rather, creating conditions ideal for the spiritual “flourishing” of all. While both teleological and deontological ethics also consider the moral value of motive, virtue ethics considers whether the act expresses moral character rather than the goodness of consequences or the rightness of upholding rules. For example, not lying because of the consequentialist fear of punishment if caught or because it is a moral duty to always be truthful even if it is hurtful or results in greater harms does not makes one an “honest person” – meaning one of overall high moral character. Hence, virtue ethics center morality on the actor rather than the act and on the good of the community rather than that of the individual. It is often difficult in the complex, real world to know what is the most virtuous way to act so virtue is an ever-on-going process that improves with wisdom and “moral sensitivity”. Role models and education are key to acquiring these. It is also hard to test the legitimacy of acts justified according to virtue ethics as the defining centrality of virtuous motive means there are no “universal rules or principles”. This also leads to criticisms that what is “virtuous” can dramatically vary across cultures and that such “moral relativism” proves that there are no absolute, universal morals, values, or truths. This threatens to reduce the gravity of acts such as rape, genocide, and slavery to the point where they are permitted with little objection. Knowing which ethical theory is used to weigh the morality of possible uses of force is key to understanding the decision-making process and for verifying the legitimacy of moral justifications. For example, deontological ethics, concerned with the “means,” would believe there is more overall moral good done in a longer war that better avoids violating the rights of individuals. Consequentialist ethics would consider it morally preferable to have an unrestrained but faster war because, based upon consideration of the “ends,” this creates less overall harm. Yet, a war viewed from one perspective but conducted according to the rules of the other would see a pattern of immoral behavior. Identifying motivating beliefs according to observed behavior/preferences is further complicated because these same behaviors/preferences could also derive from other motives and assumptions. Depending upon the specific situation, faster but more destructive wars or slower but more restrained wars can be consistent with the political realist belief that states should pursue its interests however most effective and without moral constraint as well as with an individual’s interpretation that either strategy, in its specific situation, best expresses virtuous character. Initial baselines for “normal” moral reasoning can be created by whether the expected “ends,” “means” or moral obligations, or what best expresses fundamental virtues determine when it is acceptable to do harm because it will result in more overall moral good. The role of morality in shaping strategic behavior can then be determined by looking at what factors and conditions actually influence the permissibility of doing harm and how they do so. Once identified, the reasons for what is considered moral to change are validated using the standards of impartiality, consistency, and coherence. What is “moral” is highly variable because, for instance, there are many ways to interpret moral principles, weigh their relative importance, and apply them to any given situation. Situationally-defined conditions and considerations such as at what perceived severity of a threat and at what threshold of severity is a war in self-defense morally just are highly-subjective, ambiguously-defined, and not accounted for in most IR theories that assume states will behave rationally to maximize their gains. However, the wide range of legitimate interpretations can be tested because morality cannot vary based simply upon what is most convenient or most effective for pursuing the interests of oneself or one’s state. Consistency further requires that, under the same conditions, the permissibility of doing harm is recognized as being the same when it is to one’s own detriment as when it is to one’s benefit. Moral decisions must be objective and impartial. At the same time, these nuanced standards for what qualifies as Confucian beliefs about and preferences for war do not make violence moral because it simply meets the requirements of consistency. The reasons to use force must still be coherent with the overall pacifistic preferences and values espoused by Confucianism. For example, consistent claims that countries may torture civilians any time doing so would help national security would still be immoral as it is contradictory to Confucian conceptions of benevolence, humaneness, etc. It is also kept in mind that ethical theories provide a framework for considering morally complex situations, yet, they cannot account for every possible scenario. There are times when the best option is contrary to normal beliefs and reasoning. For example, many teleological ethicists would find terrorism or the torturing of civilians immoral even if doing so was believed likely to lead to substantial military advantage. Deontologists, similarly, may weigh the morality of an act that harms noncombatants according to the military gains - such as choosing the option that kills one civilian rather than the option where two people die. As these would be indicated by patterns where such contradictions correlate to a common logical factor, again, the standards of consistency and coherence can differentiate between exceptions motivated by morality and by self-interest or efficacy. Decisions contradictory to stated beliefs and preferences also may occur because the circumstances are considered so severe that exceptional necessity permits them. Walzer argues that it is permissible to override the normal prohibition of intentionally targeting civilians only if the threat is imminent and “of an unusual and horrible kind”. In an effort to preserve the moral authority of Just War restraints, the severity of threat which permits moral transgressions is set very high. Unpleasant outcomes of “ordinary defeat” in war such as occupation or annexation do not qualify. As “the survival and freedom of political communities – whose members share a way of life, developed by their ancestors to be passed on to their children – are the highest values of international society,” only imminent threat of destruction of a “political community” is sufficiently severe. Yet, the value of political communities as well as what conditions constitute sufficient “necessity” to permit violation of normal morality is a controversial and subjective matter. Though “political and military leaders may sometimes find themselves in situations where they cannot avoid acting immorally, even when that means deliberately killing the innocent,” they may feel that necessity does not fully absolve them from having committed what is normally deemed a strongly immoral act. The “moral remainder” or “moral residue” from the recognition that what they did was simultaneously both moral and immoral is described as “Dirty Hands”. This contradiction opens the door for self-interested interpretations of ethics but recognizing that normal morality is not fully discarded even in the most extreme cases also helps preserve its relevance and legitimacy. The moral content of such conflicts can widely differ depending upon ethical beliefs. While some consequentialists would have little qualms about harming innocent civilians to ensure state survival as it is moral to do the lesser evil, most other ethical theories are not able to resolve such a sharp contradiction quite so easily. For example, there is no easy answer about what ought to be done for those who believe in strict adherence to deontological rules/virtues or to the teleological utilitarian belief that there are “no exceptions “whatever the circumstances” to their basic rule of maximising satisfactory outcomes” for all parties involved. The concept of “threshold deontology,” where teleological morality takes over for the usual deontological prioritization of rights when the consequences become sufficiently severe, similarly acknowledges that moral rules are prima facie and can be reprioritized based upon the actual circumstances. However, this does not resolve the problem that the inconsistent use of ethical theories normally invalidates any claims of moral justification. The overall morality of “supreme emergencies” is also defended by pointing out that the duties of politicians and the military create a special moral obligation to prioritize the good of their state and citizens. This allows for the partiality of harming enemy noncombatants to protect one’s own people and state but the conflict between their morality as an individual and that based upon their special role remains. Still others – such as some political realists - propose that politics sometimes requires amoral decisions to trump - but not invalidate - morality so there is little-to-no moral fault to requisite immoral acts. Examining the role of “supreme emergency” in the survey is illustrative as the degree of unresolved immorality varies depending upon the ethical beliefs of the individual. The severity and type of threats which are believed to qualify as exceptional, whether the exceptionality of the situation is interpreted as well as applied to other states consistently and with coherence, and the perceived overall morality of such exceptional acts can help measure the ethic theory used and the degree of influence moral ideals played in the decision. Although there are many reasons why inconsistencies may not indicate moral indifference, there still must be a demonstrable, substantial, and consistent preference for upholding moral ideals in order for claims of exceptional necessity to be legitimate. Such instances should correlate with state security and not just any and all pursuits of national or individual self-interests. They should also correlate with perception of relative severity of threat - not everything that is undesirable can be a severe existential threat. The strongest litmus test for moral constraint is whether or not the most effective selfish option is selected despite it being immoral. Exceptional situations and inescapable conflicts between moral obligations act as “stress tests” that effectively elucidate beliefs and preferences. For example, the lower the threshold for what threat necessitates a coercive, violent, and aggressive response, the more zero-sum and conflict prone the world is perceived to be. The frequency of support for immoral uses of force in objectively-low severity of threat situations indicates its perceived acceptability and efficacy as a tool for resolving disputes and pursuing other national interests. If, instead, such uses were seen as legitimate self-defense due to a widespread high sensitivity to threat, then they would likely be considered moral. Understanding the role of morality in strategic preferences and behavior is more complex than whether or not support for the use of force as a tool of national power tended to be quick, frequent, and correlated with its perceived efficacy. Yet, it is difficult to gain deeper insight by looking at whether or not force was used or recommended to be used in a handful of case studies. The critical distinctions which validate beliefs by testing their roles and relationships according to the principles of impartiality, consistency, and coherence require details, context, and perspective that come from methodical examination and testing of how the use of force is considered. Such an approach makes it possible to measure, and thus account for, the range of views about what is clear self-defense, last resort, and an extreme and dire threat which can vary widely by individual, culture, and situation. It also provides the insight necessary to test the moral content of justifications for war and of motives such as reciprocity and efficacy. These kinds of quantifiable limits, unique to this study, are critical to considering the diversity of beliefs, expressions of values, and the complex reasoning found in humans without slipping into moral relativism. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In a world that is becoming rapidly more interconnected and in which the balance of power is swiftly shifting, it is critical to understand a “rising” China’s strategic preferences in order to encourage peaceful and effective foreign policy engagements. This research fills scholarly gaps about Chinese strategic decision-making by creating targeted models that explain how the targeted population considers using force to address national security concerns. The data from a survey administered to students at six elite Chinese universities identify key variables that most shape and influence views on morality, the use of force, and the international system in the ideal and “real” worlds. Resultant models are then compared to established Western and Confucian ethical and international relations theories to determine the extent to which moral principles shape beliefs and effectively guide or constrain behavior. How results differ from the Confucian theory of international relations help understand how accurately current theories explain China’s actual strategic preferences. Thus, this research offers major contributions to the theoretical scholarship central to international security and Chinese strategic studies. 
