Chapter 3: Confucianism and China’s Strategic Behavior 
The Chinese often point to their classic texts and historical record to demonstrate they have long followed a Confucian-influenced cultural preference for a non-expansionist, nonaggressive and pacifistic foreign policy. While Western scholars agree that China’s “history and culture are critical sources of strategic behavior” , the strong claims to eschew the use of force are seemingly contradicted by a record of frequent violent conflicts. By closely examining Chinese history, classical writings, and influential philosophies to identify and compare normative and actual strategic behavior, Western scholars have tried to reconcile China’s professed beliefs with their actions. As it has been difficult to fit China’s behavior neatly within a strict interpretation of Confucian morality, some scholars have concluded that Chinese culture has, instead, fostered a political realist view of the international system. It may even demonstrate a preference for realpolitik-like responses to threats – strong defense of state security often requires offensive, coercive, or preemptive uses of force. Yet, because patterns of Chinese strategic behavior have also been inconsistent with political realist theory, Confucian morality may not simply serve to legitimate realist thinking and a realpolitik foreign policy. Efforts to evaluate the role of morality in China’s preferred and actual uses of force are complicated by the fact that Confucianism lacks a formal framework - such as Western Just War theory – whose overarching principles can serve as evaluative metrics. China’s claims that its historical behavior strongly evidences its pacifist disposition made it an appealing benchmark for early studies but is now considered overly reductive. As a result, there has been increased scholarly effort to create more realistic, nuanced paradigms for the Confucian system of governance and foreign policy. This chapter addresses how strategic preferences and behavior consistent with Confucian morality discussed in the prior chapter factor into the ongoing academic debate about the extent to which Confucianism shapes China’s strategic culture. Ultimately, it finds that the wide range of state behaviors that can be legitimately interpreted as consistent with Confucian beliefs and values means there are few reliable standards to assess the true role of morality in decisions to use force. Confucianism’s emphasis on virtue further complicates such efforts because morality strongly depends upon motive and the inherent limitations of historical research about China’s wars make it even more difficult to determine this. 
CONFUCIAN ETHICS IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
Confucian ideals clearly encourage nonviolent resolutions to conflicts. A state governed according to the Confucian ethical system should be based upon virtues including universal benevolence, compassion, and humaneness. This system of beliefs forms a strategic culture - or a “set of fundamental and enduring assumptions about the role of collective violence in human affairs and the efficacy of applying force” that “shapes the menu of options available to an actor in various situations as well as affects an actor’s perceptions or images of self and others”. The role of ethics in international relations should, thus, be consistent with perceptions of the character of the international system. Indeed, force should be avoided not only because it directly contradicts Confucian virtues but also because it disrupts the harmony that is central for promoting the collective good. It is less effective to destroy potential adversaries in this non-zero sum world than to accommodate or compromise with them until they recognize the superiority of the Confucian method of moral governance and, inevitably, convert into followers. In the process, China’s exemplary behavior also demonstrates a degree of virtue that legitimates its rightful place at the top of this moral hierarchy. Yet the Confucian system of governance is prescriptive rather than descriptive. Confucius, Mencius, and Xunzi’s beliefs about war were strongly influenced by having seen the suffering and destruction from years of conflict and so their teachings are intended to convince rulers to pursue compassionate governance and limited wars. Xunzi and Mencius in particular contrast the harms inflicted by violence- prone contemporary rulers with the flourishing that naturally springs forth from following the moral exemplar – called the junzi. Acknowledging that rulers may deem it foolish and dangerous to strictly comply with Confucian ideals in the less-than-ideal “real world,” between the saintly junzi and the selfish, immoral “tyrant” is the more realistic role model of the “hegemon” – one who “though morally imperfect, nonetheless, as a ruler, governs his own state with a modicum of justice, is non- aggressive towards other states, keeps his country strong and well-defended, husbands his country’s resources, and keeps his word with friends, allies, and his own people”. These archetypes reflect the “widely accepted” conception of right and wrong at that time and were intended to leverage “social pressure” to subtly “guilt trip” rulers and citizens to good behavior. The pragmatic arguments - which warn of the dangers of ambition and hubris and marginalize historical examples of glorious conquests – aim to further dissuade rulers from war and so reveal the “implicit assumptions regarding the aims that motivated the rulers’ actions”. Though the authors of The Seven Military Classics are military strategists so cannot afford to be as idealistic as Confucian philosophers, they also often advocate for some restraint in the use of force. To varying degrees and for a number of possible reasons, they suggest ways to pursue state interests, counter threats, and win wars that are effective but reduce unnecessary harm. The strong social pressure for the state as well as its rulers and citizens to behave according to Confucian norms means that the moral aspect of behavior must be addressed in any discussion about its acceptability. The three most common ways this is done – which are not unique to China or Confucianism – is that the actor desires to behave according to stipulated norms and believes that they are doing so; the actor desires to behave according to the norms but admits that the exigent conditions of the specific situation or the constant existential threat of the international system exempt normal constraints; and that, for the same reasons, the actor does not think that morality should constrain options but feels they must appeal to ideals to make their desired course of action socially palatable. However, behavior does not meaningfully vary according to which belief about the role of morality in war was dominant in the decision-making process. There are also few available historically-derived metrics that can test the veracity of an individual’s interpretation of virtuous motive.
HISTORICAL PATTERNS OF CHINA’S STRATEGIC BEHAVIOR 
Scholars have analyzed the role of Confucianism by whether the historical evidence reflects China’s claims to have a “uniquely pacifistic” culture, that it has “never been an aggressive or expansionist state” and that it has only used force in self-defense. However, the limited amount of existing and available information about how China historically considered and used force - that largely comes from official government or government-sanctioned documents - restricts the ability for modern scholars to consider important nuances of context, perspective, reasoning, and potential sources of bias. This makes it difficult to determine the sincerity of moral justifications for behavior that seems to contradict stated preferences to be “cautious and restrained” when resolving conflicts, to place “harmony over conflict,” “psychological and symbolic warfare” over direct confrontation , and for “stratagem, minimal violence, and defensive wars of maneuver or attrition”. In his pivotal book, Cultural Realism: Strategic Culture and Grand Strategy in Chinese History, Johnston sidesteps this obstacle and creates falsifiable standards by arguing that there is a conceptual connection between strategic preferences and beliefs about the “strategic environment”. Insight into motives can be gleaned by the determining the decision makers’ beliefs “about the role of war in human affairs , about the nature of the adversary and the threat it poses , and about the efficacy of the use of force ”. For example, the motive of ambiguous behaviors such as those justified as “active defense” is likely to be seen as defensive if the decision makers also seem to hold the Confucian interpretation of this paradigm – where war is an aberration, adversaries are not always zero-sum, and force is the least effective option in all but the direst circumstances. Johnston then examines The Seven Military Classics to identify its underlying preferences for the use of force and beliefs about the aforementioned assumptions. This includes how the texts rank and limit strategic choices as well as if these were due to cultural or structural influences. He then empirically tests his findings against the policy advice and behavior in the wars of the Ming Dynasty. Johnston concludes that beliefs about international system were not consistent with Confucianism but rather reflect the political realist perspective of a world dominated by anarchic, violent competition for the power necessary to assure survival of the state. He similarly finds that the Chinese viewed warfare, “as a relatively constant element in human interaction, stakes in conflict with the adversary are viewed in zero-sum terms, and pure violence is highly efficacious for dealing with threats that the enemy is predisposed to make”. Johnston further concludes that China’s writings and behavior at that time demonstrate a particularly bellicose realpolitik-like foreign policy where little faith in the efficacy of law and little consideration of morality means that states must use whatever means of power possible to protect their interests. This version of realism further maintains that other states are aggressively seeking to destroy each other so any potential enemy must be eliminated before it becomes too powerful. Johnston describes China’s perception of an exceptionally high risk and high stakes environment and its resulting preference for particularly aggressive realpolitik behavior as “parrabellum” - “if you want peace, prepare for war”. In other words, “there should be no a priori moral or political limits on the application of force, regardless of how it is justified”. Although diplomacy, accommodation, and strict defense were still seen as ideals, they are also usually considered dangerously inadequate. The use of force – even preemptively - was usually the best or only option. As Feng summarizes: The parabellum strategic culture displays a high need for the exercise of power. Leaders see conflict as permanent under international anarchy. Any tactics or strategies may be appropriate, especially the use of force when it offers prospects for large gains. Thus, the ranking of strategic preferences favors expansive strategies and tactics over defensive and accommodationist ones. Military operations will be the priority choice instead of diplomatic efforts to manage conflict and violence. In military operations, strategies and tactics to fight and win fast and completely will be favored. Despite close resemblance to the realist and realpolitik paradigms, Johnston claims that this set of assumptions and preferences were not based upon universal structural conditions but rather from specific “culture-based values”. He uses the classic military texts which other scholars have said reflect China’s unique strategic culture to support this argument. Johnston counters that the portions of the texts which other scholars said demonstrate China’s Confucian preferences were selectively interpreted and actually reflect parrabellum preferences. The pervasive pacifistic interpretation of The Art of War as advocating to avoid war altogether is not only incorrect but it is so strongly believed to shape and reflect China’s strategic preferences that it biases the conclusions of other texts so that they “end up confirming or buttressing the alleged preference for minimal violence embodied in Sun Zi’s concept of “not fighting and subduing the enemy”’. Johnston does not deny that the Confucian-Mencian strand of strategic culture exists but rather that it was seen by leaders as an impractical and inapplicable ideal. It was mostly used as a symbolic way “to clothe strategic choices in culturally acceptable language, and hence to justify the competence of decision makers, deflect criticism, suppress potential dissent, and limit access to the decision process”. The Confucian model, thus, served as “an “ideology” that justified the internal political structure of the regime without necessarily limiting the actual options available to policymakers”. 
RECONCILING INCONSISTENCIES ACCORDING TO THE PARRABELLUM PARADIGM 
Some of modern and ancient China’s policy recommendations and strategic behavior contain significant inconsistencies to what would be expected by the parrabellum paradigm. One possible explanation is that certain aspects of Chinese thinking allow for a particularly high tolerance for inconsistent and contradictory ideas to exist without them being found illogical or unsystematic. Were this the case, the realist/realpolitik framework would only explain aggressive behavior while China’s non-parrabellum actions would still derive from Confucian-Mencian values – and neither would be a good theory for explaining Chinese behavior. Consequently, Johnston claims that there existed a cultural notion of “absolute flexibility” for state security that prioritizes pragmatic consideration of the situation’s context over adherence to any specific principles or rules. Less violent behaviors such as accommodation or compromise were preliminary steps to understand and favorably shape the environment but there was always an underlying assumption that force would be necessary when the timing was most advantageous. Indeed, historical records showed little discussion about moral restraint - once deemed the most effective option, most felt that overwhelming force should be used. Even consideration of the tactics that can be used in war were based upon amoral factors such as relative power and probability of success. Confucian preferences such as stratagem, attrition, maneuver, psychological and symbolic attacks were only used to bring about more favorable conditions before using direct force. Johnston further argues for the irrelevancy of Confucian morality by pointing out that policy recommendations did not often even address the morality of force. There was little effort to justify violating Confucian ideals by appealing to moral principles or that the severity of the threat required a rare and exceptional immoral response. It instead reflects the parrabellum assumption that most any threat was so severe it required completely abandoning morality – which was exacerbated by the commonly-accepted belief that those who refused to adopt the China-centric Confucian system were “unrighteous” and “irredeemably an enemy”. Johnston also notes the belief that as long as the motives for going to war were just, morality should not limit how a war was fought was prevalent in the public statements of contemporary Chinese authorities. 
AN ATERNATE CONFUCIAN PARADIGM 
Some scholars have pointed to multiple examples where China’s strategic behavior has been consistent with Confucian values to argue that Confucianism has had at least some influence on China’s foreign policy. To reconcile these contradictions, Andrew Scobell argues that Confucian thought and realist/parrabellum views should not be considered complete opposites. He supports this by showing the passages in classic Confucian writings which indicate that Confucianism is not a “completely pacifistic” philosophy but, rather, that it acknowledges that force is, at times, a necessary part of politics. Scobell and others6 argue that China’s strategic preferences in more recent conflicts have not been as highly coercive and aggressively violent as described in Johnston’s realpolitik/parrabellum model and are more consistent with a Confucian paradigm that is less strictly pacifist as used by Johnston. Though Confucianism was not solely symbolic , Scobell admits that the overall frequency and conduct of China’s wars still strongly depart from China’s professed ideals and strategic preferences. Scobell explains this disparity by positing that China’s strategic preferences are informed by a combination of realpolitik and Confucian beliefs. Strategic decisions tend to be made using a realist interpretation of the international system but “rationalized” and justified according to Confucian thinking. Thus, China’s decision makers and citizens belief that they have long followed Confucian strategic preferences is sincere but the notion of absolute flexibility and a strong realist perspective - which “heightens threat perception” - blurs what is considered offensive and defensive behavior and allows for very broad interpretations of Confucian values. The result is the sincere belief that force should be avoided and limited but, at the same time, the high sensitivity to threats makes the frequent actual use of force seen as a last resort necessary for self-defense – rendering its frequent use is neither morally problematic nor inconsistent with professed strategic preferences. It is difficult to determine the sincerity of such justifications for war because both the claims and the resulting use of force would be indistinguishable from the same done insincerely. More significantly, it is hard to claim that Confucianism meaningfully influences strategic behavior when morality does not constrain behavior, when it makes little distinction between degrees of threat, and when its use is based primarily upon efficacy. 
REFINING THE DEBATE 
In his book, Harmony and War: Confucian Culture and Chinese Power Politics, Yuan- Kang Wang continues the discussion about whether China’s strategic preferences and behavior derive from its unique cultural history by examining its use of force during the Confucian- based but weak Song Dynasty and the Confucian-based but strong Ming Dynasty. Like Scobell and Johnston, he finds that both sides of official debates about how China should deal with threats justified their positions by appealing to Confucian beliefs but that actual behavior better corresponded to realist calculations of efficacy based upon relative state power. In his words, Confucian culture did not constrain Chinese use of force: China has been a practitioner of realpolitik for centuries, behaving much like other great powers have throughout world history. In general, China’s grand strategic choices were shaped by the country’s power position, with Chinese leaders having adopted an offensive posture when relatively strong and a defensive one when relatively weak. The historical record shows that Chinese leaders have been sensitive to the balance of power with their adversaries and adjusted military policy accordingly. However, he attributes China’s high sensitivity to threats and lack of moral restraint to the universal anarchic and zero-sum structural conditions of the international system rather than to a notion of “Chinese exceptionalism” derived from its specific historical experience. In other words, “Imperial China might well have a peaceful culture, but the structural imperatives of anarchy overrode the peaceful inclination of Confucianism. Simply put, structural imperatives trumped Confucian culture”. Wang’s thesis is that the preponderance of debates about, and uses of, force during the Song and Ming Dynasties are consistent with realist theory. To test this, like Johnston, he ascribes behavior to realism if China “adopted an offensive posture when relatively strong and a defensive one when relatively weak”. In order for Confucianism to serve as the falsifiable corollary to structural realism, Wang defines Confucian behavior as when China believed it was in a position of greater relative power but refrained from aggressive uses of force. 
STRATEGIC CULTURE 
The central issue is whether China’s uses of force have been motivated by genuine desire to follow morally virtuous strategic options. Yet this is difficult to determine by looking at behavior – especially since the goals of both realism and Confucianism can similarly appear hegemonic and revisionist. As Waldron says, the existing historical evidence makes it difficult to determine whether, for example, the Song truly believed that it was morally necessary to launch punitive expeditions against wayward states in order to restore peace and order or, as Wang claims, these were excuses for expansionist wars. Even a moral use of force unavoidably requires violating one moral principle to uphold another so a war deemed overall just according to Confucian standards, like wars justified according to realist beliefs, would still be undesirable, regrettable, and would require violating some moral principle about not doing harm. Additionally, at some level or type of threat, following Walzer’s notion of “supreme emergency,” many of those influenced by Confucian ideals will agree with realists that the threatening circumstances now qualify as “exceptional” and so the obligation to uphold ideals and/or beliefs about the general inefficacy of war no longer apply. Reflecting Walzer’s notion of “dirty hands,” whether decisions to use force were seen as moral, partially moral, immoral but necessary, or a convenient excuse is not by itself a good indicator of moral beliefs because it is strongly affected by the individual’s perception of threat and their personal beliefs about what severity of threat creates “exceptional” conditions where “necessity” permits otherwise-unacceptable behavior. Johnston, Scobell, and Wang turn to the concept of strategic culture to help discern the sincerity of ethical interpretations, applications, and justifications and, thus, whether Confucianism informs decisions about the use of force. This concept builds upon the contentious theory that states behave as rational actors by explaining how it can be rational for states to select different policy options to address similar issues despite the fact that this appears inconsistent or incoherent with the logical assumptions of realist theory. It does so by arguing that countries may differ in the “set of fundamental and enduring assumptions about the role of collective violence in human affairs and the efficacy of applying force” which, functioning as a “lens,” shape the “menu of options available to an actor in various situations as well as affects an actor’s perceptions or images of self and others”. This establishes a testable relationship between country/culture-specific worldviews and beliefs about how state security and interests should and may be pursued. Realist assumptions that war is inevitable, it is a zero-sum world, and that most states hold that force is often the most effective tool for maximizing the superior power necessary for survival logically means to many that a state’s use of force dare not be constrained by ideals. On the other hand, the idealistic Confucian worldview and the universal applicability of moral obligation to not harm others should result in a strong preference for less aggressive moral means. These scholars use strategic culture to extend rational decision making to argue that the underlying motive would also differ accordingly. Realist beliefs about the role and efficacy of violence would logically emphasize the imperative for greater power to ensure China’s survival while a Confucian worldview would logically support the creation of a harmonious society to encourage the flourishing of all humans. Therefore, offensive/expansionist wars which occur more frequently when China believes it possesses greater power than the threat are better explained by realist theory while Confucianism would create opposite preferences for pragmatic as well as idealistic reasons. At the same time, “as far as strategic culture analysts are concerned there is no universal model of rationality and what is rational for one state can be irrational for another”. How ideals should and could be applied to national security issues may differ dramatically depending upon whether they pass through the “lens” of, for example, limited rationality (where “strategic culture simplifies reality”), process rationality (“where strategic culture defines ranked preferences or narrows options”), or adaptive rationality (“where historical choices, analogies, metaphors, and precedents are invoked to guide choice”). Accordingly, the methodology of the studies not only make the controversial assumption that states behave as rational actors but, by expanding what is considered “rational,” there is greater variability in the views considered consistent with Confucianism than what is permitted by the current paradigmatic metrics. The distinction between offensive and defensive wars and the correlation between wars and perceived greater military power are used as indicators to not only test how well the realist paradigm explains China’s strategic behavior but, in order for the same factors to also prove or disprove China’s claims of Confucian influence, these realist preferences are considered incompatible with legitimate interpretations of Confucianism. However, the preferences used as indicators are not sufficiently distinct to conclude that behavior consistent with realist theory also invalidates the possible influence of the Confucian one. For example, Confucian values may align better with defensive options than offensive realist/realpolitik views but they do not require waiting until a growing threat has become the stronger military power to counter it using force. So, a correlation where the use of force increases with relative state power could derive from realist amoral aggressive calculations of efficacy or from Confucian moral considerations of efficacy such as proportionality and likelihood of success. Similarly, aggressive uses of force to counter threats when China has relative military advantage can be consistent with both the realist amoral goal to maximize state power and with the Confucian goal of a China-led harmonious society. Though the moral content may be opposite, the goal of both resemble regional hegemony and revisionist intentions. The strong sense of insecurity and threat in both worldviews similarly promotes the belief that the necessity of countering a menacing, unfriendly state with force could qualify as strict self-defense, a preventative war of self-defense, or a war that deters aggressors by increasing China’s relative power. As discussed in the previous chapter, these may appear offensive, expansionist, and revisionist but they can also fit within the Confucian idea of punitive expeditions. The Confucian model also should not be rejected based upon the realist model fitting the evidence better because the models are also insufficiently comprehensive. For example, political realist theory and Johnston’s quanbian (“absolute flexibility”) don’t explain why Ming Dynasty Confucian government officials justified their support for punitive expeditions against the weaker Mongols based upon China’s moral superiority and obligation according to tianxia but also for why, even after China was much weakened from a series of defeats, they still refused to compromise with the barbarians. 
THE RELEVANCY OF CONFUCIANISM 
P. C. Lo’s study of Confucianism in Qin and Han Dynasty politics is a good example of the persistent difficulties in differentiating between “Confucian” and “realist” behaviour. It highlights how the desire for parsimonious and falsifiable models requires making broad assumptions while a more nuanced interpretation of Confucian strategic culture would make it difficult to narrow down whether many of China’s conflicts reflect legitimate historical/cultural interpretations of Chinese Confucian “active defense,” structural offensive realism, or the belief that the extreme circumstances justify an exceptional response. Consistent with prior studies of China’s strategic culture, this further demonstrates that the validation of fit between models and actual beliefs should use distinguishing assumptions different than those used to qualitatively compare their relative suitability. The violent anarchy of the Warring States Period inspired Mencius and Xunzi’s pacifistic interpretations of Confucianism but, in contrast to such wishful thinking, it also allowed the Legalists to successfully argue that Confucianism’s idealistic governance was ineffective at ensuring state security in this “time of struggle for survival in which the strong survive by preying on the weak”. It was through the use of ruthless Legalist practices, which Lo convincingly argues are quite similar to those of offensive realism,7 that the Qin eventually conquered its neighbors and established the Qin Dynasty. However, Qin rule only lasted 14 years before “rebellions erupted and chaos returned”. The victors of the ensuing power struggle, upon establishing the Han Dynasty , officially designated Confucianism the official state religion and made Legalism as well as all other non-Confucian ideologies illegal. Official records of the debate about how Han Dynasty China should and how it did address its 400-year conflict with the neighboring Xiongnu, a nomadic group located in Central Asia and Mongolia, suggest a complex relationship between Confucianism, Legalism, and state behavior. Briefly, the Han Dynasty initially adopted an appeasement strategy towards the Xiongnu so as to focus on strengthening its domestic situation after the destructive Warring States period. As the state’s relative power increased, there was increasing support for China to shift to more aggressive measures. The official adoption of Confucian moral governance, upon which the legitimacy of the Han Dynasty was based, meant that both the political faction that advocated to accommodate the Xiongnu and those who endorsed expansive, preventative, total war justified their strategies using Confucian language. Those promoting a more offensive strategy justified this as necessary because the current approach of accommodation was ineffective, “displayed weakness,” and was “incredibly humiliating”. As a result, what began as punitive expeditions in response to the Xiongnu’s regular border raids became an extended, expansionist campaign to create a larger “buffer zone” by conquering the small states in between the two rivals. These goals are consistent with both the Legalist and offensive realist belief that strong defensive capabilities are insufficient to guarantee state security – it is necessary to be unquestioningly be the most powerful. Yet their justification as being morally obligatory in order to properly order and harmonize the region according to tianxia and to create conditions for economic prosperity is consistent with Confucianism as well. The inflation of what qualifies as necessary and “last resort” in self-defense to include preventative wars reflects the Legalist and offensive realist logic that “since there are only two choices in interstate relations, and interstate competition is a zero-sum game, a state should be proactive in dominating other states through force”. However, Confucianism could be interpreted to support, as was claimed at the time, that anything less would be a temporary peace where later generations would suffer from the aggressions of the immoral Xiongnu. Unconstrained war was also argued to be necessary because all of the less violent moral options had already been proven ineffective at eliminating the “subhuman” Xiongnu. This is consistent with both Confucian and realist beliefs that harmony/security requires being the “unchallenged hegemon”. Lo provides several reasons why he believes these behaviors derive from Legalist rather than Confucian beliefs. For one, he points to multiple references in official records that praise or claim to copy Legalist strategic preferences, teachings, and exemplars. He further questions the sincerity of Confucian strategies which do not seek to minimize violence but, instead, it appears that efficacy was the top priority and Confucian beliefs were interpreted to morally justify it. However, Lo’s emphasis on efficacy as the primary measure for paradigmatic distinction has the same shortcoming as for Johnston, Scobell, and Wang. Lo questions the sincerity of those using Confucian ideals to advocate for minimally-violent actions because he assesses that this is too idealistic and “utopian” to defeat the Xiongnu and is more in line with China’s pragmatic need for a respite in order to recover from “decades of war”. He feels that the lack of “imminent and/or serious threat and the costs for an all-out war to annihilate the Xiongnu were too high to bear” demonstrates that the “Confucian” advisors as well as the Legalist ones were just using morality to justify “pragmatic pacifism”. Assessing the influence of Confucianism based upon if there is evidence of the political realist belief that the use of force correlates to its perceived efficacy ignores the fact that both belief systems would likely more strongly support minimally-violent methods to deal with an unfriendly group who does not pose an immediate or serious threat. Lo also uses contradictory standards when relating efficacy and war to the paradigms. He claims it is a disingenuous interpretation of Confucianism to support aggressive uses of force when this is believed to be the least amount needed to effectively defend against unavoidable war with the Xiongnu and also to support nonviolent options because that, too, is considered the most effective option for China’s interests. Recognition of the severity of the Xiongnu threat by even the Confucian advisors would, then as now, foster a perception of persistent threats and frequent violent conflicts which would make it more difficult to convince rulers of “the potency of a pacifist, non-expansionist, defence-minded strategic stance” to counter domestic and international threats. Thus, the necessity of the circumstances makes it equally possible that Confucian language was disingenuously used to make the less-than-morally-ideal options more socially acceptable; that the circumstances meant that the more ideal Confucian options were legitimately considered but, regrettably, deemed not viable; and that such options were seen as consistent with the hegemonic obligations discussed as part of Confucian moral governance. Regardless of the motive, Lo observes that the Han Dynasty’s Confucian justification for the use of total, preventative, and expansionist wars to counter threats is the likely origins of contemporary China’s belief that its official strategy of “active defense” derives from the Confucian tradition. Lo traces the support for more aggressive uses of force in Mao’s as well as in current official PLA writing as further evidence of the “surreptitious merging of Legalist statecraft into imperial Confucianism [that] became a salient feature of imperial Confucian statecraft for almost 2,000 years”. If true, centuries of incorporating Legalist beliefs into Confucianism could be a substantial contributor to Scobell’s belief that China’s high sensitivity to threats is responsible for rendering most any use of force in self- defense justified according to Confucian beliefs. 
A CONFUCIAN JUSTIFICATION FOR MODERN CHINA POLICY AND BEHAVIOR 
The issues above further complicate determining the extent to which Confucian language has been used to justify amoral, expansionist pursuit of state interests. There may have been a sincere desire to uphold moral ideals but threats and appropriate responses to them were considered through a lens of “realist” assumptions about the character of the international system and a conception of Confucian morality that has assimilated key Legalist preferences. A correlation where the use of force is more likely when China perceives itself to be in a position of greater relative power can be consistent with both Confucian and realist beliefs. The hegemonic and revisionist nature of the Confucian system of moral governance and the obligation for punitive expeditions can make not only behavior but the motive and intent behind it very closely resemble that of political realism. The ambiguity of contemporary China’s motives is exemplified by its claims that its principle goals of “sovereignty, modernity, and stability” derive from Confucian values such as harmony, humaneness, and the collective good. Sovereignty is defined as territorial integrity, national unification, and maritime security ; modernity includes technological and economic progress ; and stability includes regime security, “internal peace,” and regional stability. Yet, China refuses to clarify its conceptions of territorial integrity, regional stability, and maritime security. Although much has changed since the formative experiences occurred, China claims that many of the states which benefit from the status quo are using international law and organizations, bilateral treaties and agreements, economics and technology – backed by superior military power - to “westernize and split China,” to contain it, to destabilize it, to restrict its development and to prevent it from occupying “its rightful place in the international order”. Even complaints and criticisms “about China’s violations of international norms and laws [are viewed] as part of an integrated Western strategy, led by Washington, to prevent China from becoming a great power [and]…. plots to keep Beijing off balance and encourage domestic forces bent on the overthrow of the Chinese Communist Party or the breakup of the country”. Thus while “peace, development, and cooperation” are China’s claimed preferred foreign policies to achieve these goals, threats abound. Indeed, while China’s more recent conflicts have been limited to territories it considers its own or in immediate proximity , the belief that force was the necessary response was exacerbated by China’s perception of facing constant threat where even small risks to domestic stability is likely to cause a “domino effect”. The geographical bounds and the categories of China’s national interests that must be defended are expanding as China continues to develop. 
IMPLICATIONS OF CONFUCIAN OR PARRABELLUM VIEWS AND PREFERENCES
It is not unreasonable for China to pursue the capabilities for “area denial around the periphery” and for “limited regional force projection” intended to protect maritime interests and to keep others from seizing disputed territory. China’s seizing and militarization of contested territories and its development of longer range and more lethal weapons is provocative and contradictory to such claims. Such behavior is even more concerning if motivated by realist rather than Confucian assumptions. For example, economic, technological, and political maneuvers that are ordinarily considered part of the normal and acceptable competition between states might actually be efforts to holistically shape and control these environments prior to inevitable war. 
REVISIONIST OR STATUS QUO MOTIVES? 
The nature of the threat posed by China depends upon whether or not its actions and its dissatisfaction with international rules and norms reflect a coordinated stratagem to change the current structure of the international system. If China has revisionist intentions then, as it becomes more powerful, its efforts to reshape the international system may become more aggressive. This would increase the possibility that force will be used by one side or the other. The concern that as China rises, like most rising powers, it will seek to balance against stronger powers or even seek regional hegemony is reasonable. Aspects of China’s stated strategic culture, its ongoing military modernization, and its increasingly assertive use of holistic, coercive tools to challenge the status quo further stoke anxiety that China’s current restraint from using force is mostly because it does not yet feel strong enough to win a direct confrontation. However, China’s pursuit of greater power and influence will likely challenge the dominance of other states but this does not necessarily require revisionist or hegemonic intent. A 2003 study by Johnston examines China’s more recent behavior and concludes that “the evidence that China’s leaders are actively trying to balance against US power to undermine an American-dominated unipolar system and replace it with a multipolar system is murky”. Instead, he finds indications that China sees its recent behavior that challenges the status quo as a reaction to a “perception that other states, the United States in particular, are becoming more assertive in challenging what the Chinese leaders believe are their legitimate interests”. This is consistent with Fravel’s findings that, in China’s modern conflicts, the likelihood of resorting to war increases when it perceives a weakening in its “bargaining power”. Johnston also points out that even if China is engaging in a balance-of-power with the US, there is insufficient evidence that it is trying to promote its value system on others so does not meet the definition of a revisionist state. This does not signal a change in strategic preferences as well because preferences derive from parrabellum assumptions and “refer to means of security, not to the political ends towards which they might be applied”. On the other hand, the decision to pursue status quo or revisionist goals is based upon cost-benefit analysis through the lens of a parabellum strategic culture so substantial changes to estimated costs or benefits could convince China to shift to a more revisionist policy. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The debate about whether China’s strategic preferences are constrained or even shaped by Confucian morality is far from resolved. Patterns of actual and recommended uses of force often contradict China’s claims to hold nonviolent and non-aggressive preferences yet they can be inconsistent with realist assumptions as well. Yet, qualitatively measuring consistency according to these cultural strategic preferences assumes that states behave rationally - as defined by the researcher. Even if true, the manner in which an ethical framework helps consider responses to a threat is highly subjective and variable depending upon context, perspective, and the individual’s interpretations of the principles. The consideration of cultural influences when defining assumptions about war and international affairs and characterizing what is a rational relationship between these assumptions and the use of force makes this an effective approach for testing but not validating explanatory theories. It provides flexibility to compare the “fit” between the normative strategic preferences of different theories and when and how wars were actually fought but, as a result, there is limited available insight into how decision makers weighed moral and amoral factors as well as into their beliefs about the constraining role of morality in international relations. War inherently requires frequent decisions about whether it is better or worse to violate the moral principle to not do harm in order to do a greater good as well as about when this consideration should constrain doing what is most effective. An outside observer who does not know how this weighing was done could see the resulting behavior as immoral or inconsistent with the professed ethical framework. The conduct of the war generally does not provide any insight, either, as it provides no meaningful clues whether the decision maker believed that the behavior, even if inconsistent with normative preferences, qualified as moral self-defense, was immoral but necessary due to an exceptional threat, or was immoral but necessary yet made more acceptable by using moral language. The hegemonic and highly subjective nature of Confucian ethics makes it further difficult to discern the perceived moral content of a war based upon whether China counters threats using aggressive or minimally-violent strategies and whether the use of force increases with its perceived efficacy. The use of offensive, coercive measures and consideration of the efficacy of war are not mutually exclusive to realist or Confucian beliefs. Confucian strategic preferences derive from moral ideals which may not be an effective way to respond to less- than-ideal threats. Assumptions and preferences are not concrete rules so they don’t indicate whether morality constrains using force when and how most effective. The complex and diverse methods of moral reasoning about war and the limits to understanding how this was done by looking at historical behaviour mean that the relationships between moral ideals and paradigmatic beliefs, the roles of assumptions and preferences, and the rational connection between beliefs and behaviour should be examined more closely. Key insight for resolving the ambiguities between the realist and Confucian models would come from identifying what issues besides efficacy are important when determining how best to pursue national goals; what severity of threat necessitates immoral uses of force; and what actions qualify as “self-defense.” Ultimately, the lack of absolute rules in ethics and moral decision making about war means that the most important testable metric of moral influence is the consistency and coherence of beliefs, decisions, and behavior. These add context about how China views the international system and how it will most likely perceive and respond to threats. This, in turn, can help focus foreign policy and other efforts to peacefully resolve disagreements with China.