Chapter 8: Conclusions 
In a world that is becoming rapidly more interconnected and in which the balance of power is swiftly shifting, it is critical to understand China’s strategic culture in order to encourage peaceful and effective foreign policy engagements. This research fills scholarly gaps about China’s strategic decision making by creating models that explain how China’s future generation of leaders consider using force to address national security concerns. Prior studies of China’s strategic preferences focus on whether political realist or Confucian beliefs best explain China’s strategic preferences, comparing defining theoretical factors to those derived from the past statements and behavior of China’s military, political, and academic elites. However, the dearth of relevant data means that these studies rely heavily on inference to understand beliefs, motives, and other causal factors – making educated assumptions from public behavior and the few pertinent statements and texts available to scholars. Without the necessary range of primary sources to provide critical context and balance, it is difficult to create detailed, reliable models or identify causal rather than correlational factors that explain – and can help policymakers understand – China’s strategic decision making. Determining strategic preferences requires more than just identifying patterns of behavior and comparing them to existing theories and norms. For example, preferences based upon analysis of China’s compliance or objection to normative systems of global governances like International Humanitarian Law and the United Nations fail to account for the very different implications if objections are because these are considered ineffective, immoral, or tools used by powerful states to legitimate pursuit of their self-interests. Thus, the beliefs, casual factors, and reasoning for ideological disagreements – and not outward behavior alone – are critical to understanding the extent to which China accepts or seeks to revise status quo systems of governance and will observe or violate the constraints of these norms when pursuing its interests. Administering a survey questionnaire to the elite Chinese student demographic allows for careful survey design, strategic targeting of respondents, and minimizing potential sources of error and bias. This improves the reliability and validity of the study as well as the ability to shape and account for contextual factors, thus facilitating sophisticated interpretation of the reasons and the reasoning for China’s current and future national security decision making. This research uniquely investigates moral preferences, how conflicts between pragmatic interests and ideals are weighed, and also explores justifications in order to identify causal relationships that provide greater insight to how moral and amoral factors influence Chinese decision makers. While qualitative analysis of case studies excels at developing international relations theory, deductive quantitative methodology is particularly well suited for testing how well existing theories, in this case Confucianism, explain actual beliefs. Models of the beliefs built from survey responses are also compared to Western ethical and international relations theories to identify where fundamental values may be universal and where cultural differences create informative disparities. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES 
Respondents generally viewed the international system as anarchic, zero-sum, and fairly violent though they were somewhat more idealistic about how states should behave in this environment . The strong overall support for and moral permissibility of war demonstrated a high sensitivity to threats and substantial faith in the efficacy of force . Normative beliefs about conduct in war were more consistent with deontological ethics than teleological or virtue ethics and intentionality was an important consideration . Morality did not strongly constrain behavior in war but the exceptional necessity that justified immoral harming of noncombatants did not tend to make the acts moral either . Overall, stated beliefs and the relationships between them demonstrated views, reasoning, and biases that were inconsistent with Confucianism . H2: Respondents do not hold a Confucian worldview of international relations and state behavior. Respondents believed the world to be fairly anarchic, competitive, and dangerous. These predominantly-structural conditions meant that many felt national security, broadly defined, must, ultimately, be about absolute power rather than cooperation or alliances. However, it is not as much the character of the international system but, rather, how state’s ought to behave within it that defined the role of Confucianism. The census was that states generally should follow pragmatic foreign policies rather than options more reflective of a Confucian preference to avoid conflicts such as compromise and accommodation. Yet, there was greater optimism and willingness to compromise for less important issues and when there were less direct conflicts of interest. A central premise of Confucianism is that a hierarchy of governance works because seniority is earned by moral behavior. Except in the most extreme circumstances, those of lesser moral character can be handled by providing them with moral leaders who serve as role models and inspire others through their humaneness/benevolence , reciprocity , righteousness , and propriety . The common expectation that foreign states should behave more idealistically than the respondent’s own state was inconsistent with such fundamental beliefs. This was not likely a moral bias derived from Confucian partiality to those with whom there is a special relationship because the stronger support that it was moral for the respondent’s state to favor its own citizens than for other states to do so was not seen as universally applicable. This resembles self-interest rather than devotion or loyalty. H3: Confucianism does not influence beliefs about when force should be and can be used. The low severity of threat which the majority of respondents believed made it necessary or even moral to use force did not reflect the judicious standards of “strict self-defense” or “last resort” consistent with Confucian values. Even such justifications for the scenarios where most would agree that the use of force was a last resort and in self-defense were suspect because respondents felt that their state had greater permissibility than foreign ones. The robust support for coming to the defense of other states could be attributed to Confucian values such as humaneness were they not contradicted by respondents placing stronger moral weight on respecting state sovereignty than on helping humans clearly in dire need. The observed amoral proclivity to use force in order to advance state interests was best exemplified by the 75%/81% of respondents who said that it was either “moral” or “immoral but necessary” to use force when it was in the state’s best interests to do so. The overall very strong endorsement for going to war even when deemed immoral demonstrated that Confucian norms – and moral ideals more generally – did not substantially constrain behavior. It, instead, showed that, contrary to Confucian beliefs, using force was widely seen as a more effective tool than non-coercive/nonviolent alternatives for addressing political problems. In sum, these beliefs about going to war did not reflect the moral leadership and humanness espoused by Confucianism. H4: Confucianism does not influence how force should be and can be used. Respondents felt that it was generally immoral to harm noncombatants in order to weaken the enemy though they consistently held foreign states to higher standards than their own state. The strong relationship between morality and the degree of intentionality to harm innocents rather than with what would bring about the best ends to the conflict was consistent with Confucianism as well as both deontological and virtue ethical theory. However, respondents were quick to change or ignore their assessment that some tactics were immoral due to the harm done to noncombatants. About two-thirds felt that a state could use immoral tactics if it made a difference between winning or losing just a battle or, contrary to a central principle of Confucianism, if the other state had violated reciprocity by doing so first. Opposite to one popular interpretation of Confucian “Just War” thinking, the just cause of clear self-defense - when the other state attacked first - had the least impact on moral conviction and constraint. Morality did not markedly constrain behavior but immoral acts were also not quickly redefined as moral if their use were permitted due to expediency or perceived necessity. Even the necessity of harming innocents due to the potential total destruction of the country did not fully justify immoral acts. Most approved of using force for this reason but still believed there to be an irreducible moral remainder similar to “Dirty Hands” – though this is an alien concept to Confucianism due to its belief in the inherent virtue of leaders and the highly situationally- dependent nature of its ethics. H1: Confucianism does not influence the strategic preferences of elite Chinese students. The patterns of responses and the scores for the four latent beliefs did not strongly reflect Confucian values, beliefs, or preferences. To some extent, normative beliefs more closely reflected Western Just War theory and its legal progenitor, International Humanitarian Law. The strong support for the use of anti-personnel mines was one obvious exception. Beliefs about the international system and state behavior in it were not notably collaborative, compromising, or win-win. Respondents strongly supported using force to further state interests as well as to address even minimally threatening behavior of unfriendly states. It did not take much for respondents to deem it permissible to use force that violated virtues such as benevolence, reciprocity, and humanness. Many of the instances where majority beliefs were consistent with Confucian values were contradicted by respondents holding foreign states to higher moral standards than for their own state. Confucian morality did not influence strategic preferences; however, this does not mean that Confucianism has little influence on related societal norms and mores of contemporary China. Respondents felt quite strongly that governments and individuals have different roles in society and, so, have different moral responsibilities and obligations. For example, there was no evidence to contradict the widespread belief that morality - the rights, obligations, and privileges - of individuals strongly depends upon one’s place in the relevant hierarchy. Actually, 3 years of related field research support both this assessment and that this system promotes non-confrontational conflict resolution through compromise, avoidance, and accommodation. However, Confucianism and political realism blur together in that, as with morality in war, Confucian preferences and values are followed to the extent that relative power and other factors make it pragmatically beneficial or necessary to do so. The defining role of relative power combined with China’s cultural-historical motivations to reassert itself as a great power also makes it difficult to differentiate between realist-driven regional hegemony and the Confucian hierarchal “tributary state” model of governance. These ambiguities were ultimately resolved based upon disparities in the perceived morality of behavior and the central Confucian tenet that following proper behavior rather than coercive tactics should be used to rectify improper/undesirable situations. 
ADDITIONAL FINDINGS 
Respondents with scale scores more indicative of Confucian beliefs tended to answer the component questions of each latent factor with greater coherency than respondents with less idealistic scores. A holistic and relatively well-defined framework of principles such as Confucianism appeared to help guide decision making for complex issues. The lesser cohesiveness of those with non-Confucian scores also suggested that their reasoning was not as strongly guided by an alternative theory such a political realism. Though they demonstrated greater variance in their beliefs for each factor, they were fairer in their judgments. Reflecting realist assumptions about the role of ethics in international relations, those with a more pragmatic, amoral view were more likely to recognize the necessity for all states to not be constrained by ideals. In contrast, those who expressed stronger support for moral ideals were more likely to hold foreign states to higher standards of behavior than their own. They were also more inconsistent in their moral assessments, most likely because morality was used as an excuse rather than as a coherent framework to help guide decision making. Indeed, the morality of the same use of force that varies based upon a scenario that differs only in whether it’s use benefits the respondents’ self-interest further undermines the sincerity of such claims. The legitimacy of these moral justifications is further contradicted because such bias directly contradicts the core Confucian virtues of benevolence and humanness to all others – and even more so given the importance that Confucianism places on the virtue of reciprocity. It was possible that the disparate permissibility of the respondents’ state and of foreign states using force may not have been due to unequal moral standards but rather due to an inherent difference in how respondents perceived the threat. The relational proximity of a threat to the respondent’s own state likely made it feel more immediate and personal and, thus, more severe than how they perceived the same threat to a foreign state. However, contrary to what would be expected, whether the moral and overall permissibility of going to war for the scenarios provided were biased did not correlate with the situation’s relative severity of threat. Instead, it correlated with the moral complexity of the situation. Bias was greater for the more straightforward situations – like when the other state has attacked first - and less so when the situation needed to be carefully considered. There was also further evidence that deontological means were more widely considered legitimate, universal ideals while the acceptability of teleological reasoning was more subject to self-interest. For instance, it was less morally permissible for foreign states to use tactics that would harm noncombatants to weaken the enemy than for the respondent’s state to do so. However, this correlated to the preferred ethical theory used for moral reasoning. Those who evaluated the morality of these acts based upon what would likely bring about the “best” end (teleological evaluation of what is “good”) were much more likely to say that the act was more morally permissible for their own state than for foreign states. Those who considered the means – whether these acts were “right” or would violate certain prima facie moral principles – felt the acts were more equally immoral for all states. Similarly, respondents felt that it was better for their state to fight a quick, unrestrained war while other states should have a longer but more restrained war. The strong and common belief that it was an amoral necessity for states to counter even minor threats with offensive, unconstrained force was consistent with respondents’ overall non- Confucian view of the international system. There was also significant bias observed where China had greater permissibility to use force, though only for the more straightforward situations - such as when the enemy wants to totally destroy the country, when the state will be attacked imminently or has already been attacked, etc. This disparity may have been due to respondents answering more instinctively whereas they needed more time to consider the complex scenarios. The straightforward situations could be answered more quickly because it was easier for respondents to utilize fundamental beliefs as heuristics. Rather than weighing conflicting beliefs about the in-group and the out-group, respondents reflexively reacted to compelling emotions about their national identity, history, image being under threat. Unambiguous cases of self-defense were made even more necessary and more moral when considered in the context of the widespread perception that China’s inherent superiority proves its rightful place as a great power and that it has been a constant target of aggression by barbarians who seek to humiliate and dominate it. Though respondents were influenced by structurally-derived beliefs that Confucian idealism is an inaccurate description of how states behave and so should not constrain foreign policy, culturally-derived perceptions dramatized the severity of their implications. 
GENDER 
Women were, on average, more idealistic than men for all four factors. The most notable difference was that women were substantially less likely to see the three proposed acts in war as morally okay. Men also had a wider range of views about all the issues except the permissibility of going to war. They were also more biased, holding foreign states to higher standards than their own state. For men, moral concern for civilians in war decreased as their perception that the international system was zero-sum competition for survival increased while women were more concerned about civilians regardless of perceived threat. Men also felt that morality was more contextual and less binding for their state than for other states. Women, on the other hand, did not expect foreign states to be more strongly constrained by moral ideals in war than their own state. Although IR theory assumes that the extent to which states should be constrained by morality is strongly related to how dangerous the world is perceived to be, neither gender showed a strong connection between these when thinking about foreign states. Women, who had more optimistic views and stronger moral conviction than men, felt that this relationship was even less important for their own state. In strong contrast, men felt that the importance of moral constraint for what their own state could do in war was dramatically more contextually dependent upon existential threat inherent to the international system. 
ETHNICITY 
There were more differences in beliefs about international relations and war between those of Han ethnicity and those of non-Han ethnicity than there were between male and female respondents. Overall, Han respondents were substantially less idealistic about the international system than non-Han. Perhaps in recognition of the universality of structural conditions, they felt more strongly than non-Han that even the foreign policy of other states should be pragmatic. However, not only did Han respondents more strongly agree with Thucydides’ description that states ultimately care only about power but different issues were responsible for shaping Han and non-Han views about this. Stronger identification with China may make Han citizens more sensitive to potential threats and more receptive to such nationalistic messaging. These groups also considered different issues when evaluating the morality of foreign states depriving civilians of food, medicine or water to weaken the enemy. This may be due to the historical experiences and socio-economic power disparities of China’s majority and minority ethnicities. Perhaps for similar reasons, state self-interest had a stronger effect on those of Han ethnicity than those of non-Han. Indeed, non-Han respondents were more conflicted than Han respondents about the character of the international system, how their own state’s interests and security should be pursued, and whether their state’s moral behavior in war was based upon the means or the ends. Additionally, though there was little difference in beliefs about a foreign state’s permissibility to go to war, Han respondents felt that it was substantially more permissible for their own country go to war than non-Han respondents. One notable exception was that non-Han were more supportive of China conducting humanitarian interventions. Both Han and non-Han felt that the more dangerous the international system was perceived to be, the more morality in war should be based upon the ends rather than the means. However, both groups also felt more strongly that morality was contextual for their own state and that morality was more objective and less mutable for other states. Non-Han also felt that this relationship was more important in defining their state’s moral behavior while Han respondents saw less need for these beliefs to be coherent. Ethnicity did not influence normative beliefs about foreign states harming civilians in order to weaken the enemy. At the same time, though, Han respondents perceived the international system as more threatening than non-Han but also held higher expectations that foreign countries ought to be more constrained by morality – except if the enemy’s intent was total destruction of the country. Non-Han respondents felt much more strongly that, even for foreign states, the importance of moral constraint depended upon the severity of threat being faced. The severity of threat was strongly related to how dangerous the world was believed to be in general but even more to an immediate threat – indicated by how quickly an unfriendly state’s behavior deemed it necessary to go to war in self-defense. The reverse of these relationships was seen for those thinking about their own state; morality was a more objective influence on what non-Han respondents felt their own country could actually do in war. For example, Han respondents felt that the danger of the international system was twice as important for whether their state could engage in immoral acts in war while the higher expectation for other states remained less subjective. While non-Han respondents had a more optimistic view of foreign relations and were more supportive of their own state’s moral behavior than Han, unlike for Han respondents, these issues were not seen as related. Furthermore, non-Han were more likely to continue behaving morally in war even if the other side started using tactics that immorally harmed civilians or if doing these immoral acts would determine the outcome of the battle. Even non- Han respondents who judged morality in war based upon whether the acts brought about the best ends rather than whether they violated specific moral principles showed greater moral constraint than Han respondents who used the same moral reasoning. 
MEASUREMENT LIMITATIONS 
The goal of this study was to identify the strategic preferences of elite Chinese students and to evaluate how well they reflected Confucian ethical, international relations, and decision making theoretical frameworks. Other theories were considered but the need for brevity and rigor meant that questions focused on the issues which define Confucianism. Especially given the diversity of human reasoning, not all possible interpretations, variations, and influences could or should be considered . Moreover, deductive quantitative testing of how well a specific theory fit new empirical data is more precise but also less exploratory than using inductive reasoning to discern a framework of theoretical principles from patterns found in specific case studies. This project established broad yet definite bounds for what qualified as legitimate interpretations of Confucian principles in order to appropriately balance accuracy and diversity. This increased confidence in the results while also allowing for less popular patterns of beliefs and preferences to be identified, quantified, and characterized. Tests of validity, reliability, and of the relationships between principles and with latent factors reported no substantial problems with the measurements of beliefs and preferences. In other words, the survey questions accurately quantified the targeted beliefs, values, principles and their relationships to one another. While the consistency between respondents’ aggregate beliefs for each latent factor fit the predictions of the strategic culture rational decision making model, the latent factors had a not-insubstantial amount of covariance for which the models could not account. The issues that political realist and Confucian strategic culture theories traditionally examine to describe and predict the international system and state behavior in it were also found to be weaker indicators than assumed. In other words, these theories seemed to explain preferences and behavior better than they really did because qualitative analysis relies upon inferred correlation for causation. Statistical modeling indicated that the core assumptions of Confucian strategic culture and political realist theories used in many prior studies only partially explained Chinese respondents’ reasoning about the use of force and partially measured their beliefs about the international system and state behavior in it. Factor analysis indicated that it was not likely that these discrepancies came from respondents considering an additional underlying belief or assumption. Nor did it reveal a pattern of stated beliefs indicative of a different guiding theory or of a different interpretation of Confucian theory. There was some evidence that Chinese nationalist beliefs acted as a lens that influenced perceptions in a similar manner as Confucian strategic culture. The unifying premise is that China’s salvation from its century of victimization and humiliation at the hands of barbarians requires that it reclaims its Confucian-based “historical entitlement to great power status and moral authority,” by reestablishing the modern-day equivalent to a China-led tributary system. China refers to this goal as the “China Dream” though it seems to have important similarities to the concept of the regional hegemon. Specifically, China’s existential right to great power status requires possessing superior economic, military, and political power in order to favorably alter status quo international norms and achieve its expansive conceptions of “territorial integrity, sovereignty, and international legitimacy”. This is consistent with political realist assumptions of power politics, the Confucian hierarchical model of international relations, and the Qing Dynasty incorporation of fuqiang into Confucian national-civilizational identity. It thus is a logical contributor to respondents’ overall zero-sum, violent view of international relations and their correlated endorsement of immoral uses of force to pursue national interests and to address even minor threats. It is possible that respondents further believed that China’s unique superiority and Mandate of Heave means that China is morally obligated to reestablish the modern equivalent to the Confucian concept of tianxia. Though some may have felt that way, survey results did not exhibit the significant influence expected from such a moral imperative. 
SAMPLING LIMITATIONS 
Nearly every study that has examined China’s strategic culture or the strategic preferences of its leadership did so by analyzing the limited historical records and testimonials available. The context in which these documents were written contain many unknowns and contemporary Chinese have been extremely reticent to comment on these issues – save for the occasional carefully-crafted-for-the-public narrative. This made the perspective gleaned from this primary-source, large-n study particularly insightful. Though it would have been ideal to survey China’s current political decision makers, the topic of the survey very clearly proved to be too sensitive. Elite Chinese students were a very good alternative demographic for this study of China’s strategic culture. One reason was because they are a good representation of the generation and perhaps even demographic likely to make up a significant portion of China’s future leaders. Due to the confluence of factors such as corruption, the Confucian concept of guanxi , and disparities common to many hierarchies, those in positions of leadership and influence have a greater ability to give their children the values, perspectives, skills, and opportunities key to achieving success . Because parents tend to pass on their formative experiences, beliefs, and influences to their children, the views of elite students have the potential to provide more insight in current elites than many other accessible populations in China . Even the comparatively less privileged students who attend China’s top universities have an advantage to become a future elite whose political and political-moral perspective were similarly shaped with the expectation that they likely will assume leadership positions in the coming years . Though many will pursue careers outside of the government and the CCP, the pervasiveness and intrusiveness of political ideology throughout Chinese society means that many other elites, especially those involved in education and economic issues, will likely accrue political influence . Traditional cultural emphasis between the “in-group” and the “out-group” reinforces “groupthink” and heightens the “identity difference perceptions” of Chinese elites, which has been found to serve as “important explanations of policy differences” . At the same time, recent research has suggested that the growing average level of education – especially in Beijing – and the “opening up” of China due to globalization and technology has provided recent generations of students with a more balanced perspective of the international system and a less prejudiced inclination to negatively interpret the behavior of other states . If true, then the findings of this study are even more valuable for understanding China’s future leaders. Additionally, should the findings that China’s elite students hold strongly non- Confucian views and strategic preferences not be applicable to China’s current cadre of leaders, it is very likely that the current decision makers hold even more pessimistic views of the international relations and are even more inclined to use coercion and force. It is impossible for social science survey research to resolve or even adequately address all possible differences of a population but the legitimacy and value of this methodology is widely recognized even with its unavoidable limitations in measures and sampling . Indeed, many Western studies of cultural, psychological, political, and other components of social science continue to use students to represent a much broader demographic. That this study focused on China’s strategic culture further reduced the significance of as well as the potential for unresolvable shortcomings due to the targeted population. Gray argues that, The policymaker, the military professional, and the concerned citizen, cannot approach contemporary challenges in a strategic cultural void. Human beings are encultured as people who live in communities, and because, alas, those communities are communities for security, humans have no choice other than to undergo a process of strategic enculturation. Therefore, “the principal purveyors of China’s strategic culture narrative today are political and military elites and scholars…but the narrative resonates powerfully with the ordinary people of China who also serve as keepers in the era of a rising new Central Kingdom” . Those who grew up fully immersed in Chinese society should be even more inculcated with the influential cultural beliefs due to China having a single dominant political-military culture . For these reasons, understanding a strategic culture should include identifying its norms by “tapping into the population” using methods such as “polling and focus groups” . In sum, the fact that strategic beliefs are presumably shaped by and reflect broader cultural ideology means that they should be statistically discernable from the beliefs of normal citizens with enough data points . Variance is still expected due to the diversity of human reasoning but the systemic origin of structural realist causal conditions means that influences below that level of analysis matter only insofar as they created biases and error that led to irrational behavior. There were surely additional influential considerations, as evidenced by the variance and covariance for which the models did not account, but the comprehensiveness of a theory must be balanced with parsimony. “Strategic culture as instrumental rationality bounded by the ideational constraints emerging from a certain national style” serves no useful purpose if it is too broadly permissive of perceptual deviations from the standards of rationality . The Confucian strategic culture model used in this study, following common convention established by prior ones, necessarily restricted the number of acceptable influences on political realist theory, While most of those studies assessed China’s strategic culture according to historical accounts of discussions by actual decision makers and of actual behavior, the same paradigms were used and the same assumptions were tested because this followed the conventional, proven, and accepted method of analyzing China’s strategic culture at the cultural and structural level. Using the same theoretical models based upon the same causal variables operating at the same level of analysis – which deliberately doesn’t consider variations of the underlying population – as prior studies should help prove the validity of this survey’s results. Though there were some importance differences regarding the source of beliefs as well as the role of Confucianism on them, Johnston, Wang, and Scobell all found that Chinese strategic culture was fairly consistent with political realist assumptions. This study similarly found that the strategic beliefs and decisions of the elite Chinese student demographic generally complied with what would be expected given the assumptions of strategic culture (“rational”) – especially if Chinese nationalism was taken into account. In other words, this study confirmed that elite Chinese students were consistent with what those seminal studies found to be true at the structural and cultural level of analysis. It is, therefore, possible that the elite Chinese student demographic was not an accurate representation of current Chinese leaders but the results suggested otherwise. Especially given China’s 1.4+ billion people and 56 ethnicities, targeting one specific group for the survey demographic was also a necessary and advantageous limitation. It is to be expected that there will still be differing opinions about how well the explanations just provided resolve potential drawbacks of targeting elite Chinese students but, even should these concerns remain, not only was there no better viable alternative but they were overall still a good choice. The key aspects of geographic and ethnic diversity, the survey’s large n, and including aspects of qualitative methodology helped further mitigate sampling and measurement limitations. For example, the findings from quantitative analysis of the survey population were further validated by comparing them to those from qualitative studies of historical records about Chinese decision makers. The occasional points of disagreement provided additional context that aided in the interpretation of identified response patterns. IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY US foreign policy has generally sought to alter China’s behavior by convincing it that the international system is not a zero-sum, amoral, existential competition that unfairly favors the status quo powers. However, substantial uncertainty and disagreement about whether China’s strategic goals and behavior are shaped by Confucian moral ideals has divided such efforts. This study provided convincing, detailed clarification that many in China feel beset by constant, severe threat and that the beliefs and preferences of China’s next generation of leaders were not strongly influenced or constrained by Confucian moral ideals. There are neither easy nor plentiful policy prescriptions for dealing with states which believe that politics and war are too dangerous for their behavior to be constrained by moral ideals. As a result, the US has largely pursued a pragmatic but norms-based approach towards China. The insights from this study indicate that “hedging” remains the best overall strategy . They also suggest how this approach may be used more effectively. The improved understanding of how China is likely to interpret and react to various policy options from the findings of this study can help policy makers find the best balance between deterrence and incentives as well as how best to operationalize it. Doing so provides a wider range of specific, scalable, flexible military and non-military options while preserving the US’s deterrent and moral credibility. More specifically, findings suggest that China would be more willing to compromise and cooperate on less threatening and less contentious issues. Efforts to accommodate China on its “core” issues will not likely be answered in kind so maintaining the status quo for them through hard power deterrence is recommended. Efforts to resolve these and, even more so, lesser disagreements should thoroughly explore holistic, indirect options which avoid issues of “face” like stark contrasts between “winner” and “loser.” They should also emphasize consideration of the desired results rather than the value qualities of the process. It should be expected that the “fairness” of proposed outcomes will be evaluated based more upon what it implies about the relative power of the parties within a hierarchal relationship than on whether it seems equal. Disagreements should acknowledge the reality of state competition and should be discussed in terms of legitimate state interests rather than appealing to aspirational ideals of governance. The pragmatic win-win economic benefits of proposals should be stressed in order to engage China’s prime concern of state self-interests while also mediating suspicions from the belief that this is a zero-sum game. At the same time, though, pessimistic beliefs about the self-serving behavior of other states mean that China will view agreements with narrow limitations on specific issue. The importance of context, fostering harmony and good relations, and motive mean that even agreements are quite flexible and cooperation likely will last only as long as deemed advantageous. Due to the observed relative unimportance of morality for many Chinese, disagreements involving values and principles should be kept separate from amoral ones. Especially since suspicion and resentment of Western moralizing makes it an unpersuasive tool in negotiations, moral components of disputes should be broached with caution. Even if possible to address moral concerns separately, it should be broached with caution due the very different roles which morality traditionally plays. Due to the demonstrated mutability, partiality, and hierarchical prerogative of virtue, it should be expected that China will agree to broad principles but may reinterpret them according to the situation. As seen in the survey, this may be done so “moralistic appeals and denunciations” can be used to help justify self-interests . The reported strong belief that morality should not constrain China’s foreign policy and that other states are also not constrained by it contributes to the perception that Western appeals to morality are actually just tactics of manipulation and deception. While China will likely feel little hesitation to contravene moral principles when convenient, the US is generally more constrained by moral conviction, concern for reputation, and the desire to preserve the regulative authority of moral principles. Particularly for high profile disputes, this can give China a strong asymmetric advantage. Not only can China leverage this to achieve its material goals but using Western morality to constrain US behavior offers them the opportunity to also score a psychological and reputational victory. Their loud protests of hypocrisy if the US ignored its vaunted Western moral norms would be considered an even better victory. US foreign policy has remained fundamentally based upon the belief that its reasoning, logic, and behavior will, inevitably, alter China’s belief that is under constant, severe threat. Findings indicated this will be quite difficult for several reasons. For one, this is made more difficult due to China’s view being tied to the emotionally-charged sense of victimization and humiliation inflicted by the “duplicitous” West. Two, the hegemonic conditions necessary to assuage this, if possible at all, would be untenable for most other states. The difficulty of altering these views combined with the fact that views of the international system were found to only moderately shape opinions about the use of force indicated that efforts to develop an effective response to China’s foreign policies and behavior should look for less intransigent beliefs. The influential beliefs of strategic culture and nationalism reported in the survey results offer another option. It is more advantageous for the US to address conflicts of interest and greater room and flexibility for bargaining where historical experiences, cultural differences, and mirroring increase the potential for China to have radically different interpretations of what the US believed were quite rational policies. These are the places where China’s strategic cultural and nationalist beliefs create inconsistent goals and preferred methods to pursue them. For example, where interests conflict, strategies should prioritize those which offer a comparatively greater cost-benefit ratio because strategic culture-influenced perceptions make them “irrationally” less important to China. The messages from increasing economic, political, and military activities in Africa, the Americas, and Europe as well as soft power tools like entertainment media can have a significant effect on China’s international and domestic behavior while being disproportionately less provocative because they don’t overtly threaten its “core interests.” Conversely, gestures that are objectively low threat but symbolically confrontational – like anything that remotely could impinge on China’s sweeping and expanding notions of territorial integrity and sovereignty – are likely to make China feel “slighted” and offended . This conveys strong, pointed signals that remain below the conventional threshold of war. Inciting nationalist passions involves the risk of miscalculation but also increases the potential for strategic blunders that offers additional advantages to the other competitor. The overlap of Confucian and political realist beliefs seen in the survey findings suggest that the CCP and Chinese government’s reputations are a significant “center of gravity.” Though less important that China’s economic performance as both a material and nationalist priority, their legitimacy as well as that of its leaders are linked to virtue at least to the extent where it exerts some influence on their decisions and behavior. Though there are likely other motives as well, the most obvious example is the growing intolerance for corruption and the fairly aggressive effort to rectify it. Moreover, face and shame remain fairly effective means of controlling behavior. Thus, “naming and shaming” poor behavior - especially when it also has pragmatic implications to the material interests of Chinese citizens – is an avenue of influence that also have a fairly low risk of escalation. It is likely that the many challenges China is facing as it rapidly develops – as well as the heightened sense of threat due to its greater immediacy/conceptual proximity to the respondent - contributed to the observed widespread bias of holding foreign states to higher standards than the respondents’ own state. Thus, the normative behaviors of other states can serve as role models that appeal to and legitimate the idealistic aspirations identified in the survey. Showing how nations, especially other than the US, derive greater overall benefit by complying with international laws and norms – despite having to accept the same risks posed by the international system – can help emphasize to Chinese citizens the pragmatic value of the domestic and international law. This would not be a difficult strategy to implement as it is neither expensive nor does it substantially compromise US interests. Though it should include placing greater emphasis on how Chinese citizens will likely interpret proposed US behavior, it is largely a matter of coherent, strategic messaging that highlights the US’s strengths and beneficial contributions to the international community. Efforts should focus on using acceptable and effective forums such as educational and cultural exchanges and should include continuing to offer young Chinese an alternative worldview and a more nuanced interpretation of American behavior within it. The incremental gains from these kinds of policies can, in aggregate, moderate tensions so that competition over national interests are less likely to lead to war. They may even help gradually reduce inflammatory perceptions that it is a zero-sum, anarchic, violent world. The options available to moderate China’s deeply ingrained beliefs and perceptions are limited and grow increasingly unappealing in relation to efficacy. Most extreme, cognitive research has shown that “potential catalysts for change…might be ‘dramatic events or traumatic experiences [such as revolutions, wars, and economic catastrophes]’ that would ‘discredit thoroughly core beliefs and values.’ Such change would be accompanied by extreme psychological stress and would require a resocialization process, involving participation by various groups in crafting a compromise on a new political cultural orientation” . Avoiding full scale conflict while still deterring China from unacceptable expansion and coercion is best done using a hedging strategy. Indeed, “the decision to pursue status quo or revisionist goals is based upon cost-benefit analysis through the lens of a parabellum strategic culture so substantial changes to estimated costs or benefits could convince China to shift to a more [or less] revisionist policy . The aspects of China’s strategic culture just discussed can be combined with hard power deterrence for an overall more persuasive effect. For example, in conflicts, “the key to dealing with China is to properly manage China’s perception of prestige while making it obvious that exercising its military option will not be inexpensive” . Though even the use of nonviolent, coercive uses of military power as a deterrent is less than ideal, it may be a necessary measure while other avenues are also pursued. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE STUDY OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
Directly addressing the central theory of Chinese Strategic Studies, this study clearly affirmed that the foreign policy views and the strategic preferences of elite Chinese students were not strongly influenced by Confucian values. The unique data and methodology of this project allowed for rigorous and precise measuring and validation of Confucian strategic culture theory to real world reasoning and makes the findings more significant. Contrary to a fundamental assumption of rational choice theory, there was strong correlation but not causation between personal values, beliefs about the international system, strategic preferences, and state behavior. Additionally, the beliefs about the international system used to define and differentiate IR theories were found to be poor measures of respondents’ actual views. Most international relations research centers on testing the ability of IR theories to explain specific historical examples of state or leader behavior . Qualitative analysis is often advantageous for developing and refining an IR theory because “the analyst enjoys considerable flexibility in the role, weight, and meaning assigned to each piece of evidence” as well as the interpretation of IR theory used . 58 Adjustments can be made so that the behavior predicted from the theoretical worldview and underlying beliefs is more consistent with what was observed. However, this adaptability makes evaluating the theory’s ability to explain empirical data imprecise, hard to measure and validate, and more susceptible to bias . It is difficult to determine whether a paradigm which failed to adequately explain the behavior of a state or a leader was because it was the wrong theory, the wrong interpretation of the theory, or misdirected logical comparative reasoning . In essence, researchers often must decide whether the cause was the theory or their own incorrect reasoning and judgment. This project’s quantitative methodology, first-person large-n data, and targeted questionnaire rigorously and objectively identified possible interpretations of Confucian IR theory, how well these interpretations explained stated beliefs and preferences, and the meaningful patterns from where theory was consistent and inconsistent with the evidence . 59 The findings are even more compelling because the results from statistical analysis can easily be examined and reproduced by others . The study design also provided the usual opportunity to examine the fundamental tenet of rational choice theories - that a specific worldview, characterized by beliefs about a few related issues, shapes strategic preferences, which strongly guide state behavior . Confirmatory Factor Analysis found that respondents’ beliefs about the issues assumed to define and differentiate worldviews according to rational choice theory were strongly connected by a common factor. However, SEM found these beliefs were incomplete indicators or measures of overall worldviews. There are other unidentified issues that significantly contribute to beliefs about modern geopolitics. CFA also showed that respondents recognized the theoretical connection between overarching worldviews, strategic preferences, and endorsed behavior. However, more precise Structural Equation Modeling indicated strong correlation but fairly weak causation between these components. In other words, the theoretical relationships may be “logically consistent and empirically valid” but they didn’t shape the actual decision-making process of elite Chinese students as strongly as studies that used qualitative inference of historical behavior concluded . This could be evidence that inconsistencies between observed beliefs, preferences, and behavior were due to states and leaders not being as rational as assumed by theories. It also could be due to common sources of researcher bias such as evaluating the “rationality” of observed beliefs, views, and behavior based upon standards that were consistent with their own values . It was more likely that respondents’ strategic decision making was strongly influenced by political realist assumptions supported by a strategic culture that included Confucian beliefs about China’s cultural-national identity, history, and international image. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 
This study contributes compelling new evidence that states don’t behave as predicted by structurally-based rational choice theory. Future research should look for additional – possibly intermediary/moderating - factors that would improve the ability of existing theories to explain behavior. The results of this study highlight a number of ways where further study would likely yield additional valuable insights about this. Perhaps most interesting would be to see how the results of this survey compare to those of an equivalent population from a different country/culture. Another good project would be to examine how well the models from this study explain China’s past strategic behavior. This would help refine the models so they can provide better insight into contemporary strategic decisions and behavior. The possibility that Chinese nationalism was an important influence on decisions about the use of force suggests strong potential to improve the explanatory power of strategic culture theory. Indeed, ” a good theory,” as Walt states,” does not leave us wondering about the causal relationships sas work…” such as “when it identifies an important causal factor but not the factor most responsible for determining outcomes” . There are also a number of ways that the existing data could be further analyzed to provide additional detail and insights. For example, the ~1000 surveys completed by non- students could be tested and the findings compared to those from the students. The effects of demographic variables such as education, which school was attended, and home province could also be examined in more detail. The findings from this study should be used to inform future research that seeks to identify other influential factors and to determine whether they are additional facets of existing theories, intermediary/moderating influences to them, components of a totally distinct theory, or evidence that respondents tend to be inconsistent in their beliefs or methods of reasoning. Such research should give particular attention to the possible influence of Communist and Legalist value systems. For the reasons mentioned earlier, it would be more effective to use qualitative analysis to do this. Often an entire doctoral project by itself, this study tested new scales and methodology for measuring normative and pragmatic beliefs as well as for the decision-making process used to consider foreign policy and the use of force. They, accordingly, make unique contributions to the related fields of political and moral psychology, comparative military ethics, international relations theory, and ethical decision making. These instruments could be used with different populations to further refine them while providing additional context and insights into issues at the heart of international relations, security theory and practice. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This study systematically examined the major components of Confucian and political realist international relations theory as well as of deontological, teleological, virtue and Confucian ethical theory. Quantitative analysis of a large-n, first-person, and theory-based survey questionnaire created detailed models that were well suited to consider the diversity of human reasoning. Elite Chinese students were an excellent population to examine because they are likely to have been influenced by the structural and/or cultural conditions most likely responsible for China’s strategic culture. They also share many of the advantages that have traditionally been most helpful for achieving elite status in China’s hierarchy. As a result, measuring beliefs about the character of the international system, how states should behave within it, and the permissibility of using force contributed a new, policy-relevant perspective to the central issues of Chinese Security and Strategic Studies while also providing theoretical insights derived from precise quantitative testing of their fundamental assumptions. The dramatically different methodology and unique source of data confirmed that respondents’ views of international relations and strategic preferences were not particularly consistent with Confucian moral ideals. Beliefs of elite Chinese students felt that the world was quite dangerous and had a strong inclination to use force despite generally believing that it was immoral to do so. However, there was less consensus about how states should behave on issues not directly related to national security. There was some indication that these views derived from structural rather than cultural conditions. Harming noncombatants was seen as generally immoral though the intentionality of doing so was an important consideration about this. Respondents were also quick to feel that the severity of the circumstances justified ignoring morality in war. However, necessity did not tend to make immoral uses of force now moral. Additionally, respondents consistently held other states to higher moral standards than their own. The issues which define political realist and Confucian strategic culture paradigms were incomplete measures of respondents’ actual worldviews. Their worldviews, strategic preferences and decisions were inconsistent with the predictions of structural realist theory but better followed the assumptions of rationality that included the influence of a non-pacifistic interpretation of Confucian strategic culture. Significantly, the beliefs of this version of Confucianism, combined with a political realist view of contemporary international relations, provided an excellent explanation for the beliefs and goals of contemporary Chinese nationalism. This likely explained the observed strong correlation but low causation of the models as it was conceptually substantially different than those represented by the existing but its effects would have been consistent with observed beliefs and their effects on strategic preferences and decision making. This study contributed a number of insights useful for future policy makers. For one, the future leaders of China have a high sensitivity to threat and are not inclined to interpret and respond to the behavior of other states based upon moral ideals. Additionally, foreign policy discussions regarding how to engage China should not assume that existing IR theories guide China’s decision making nor should they overly depend upon existing IR theories to interpret China’s behavior. A potentially effective way to influence China’s foreign policy and strategic behavior would be to focus on where the combined beliefs of a non-pacifistic Confucian strategic culture, Chinese nationalism, and political realism exaggerate or downplay what would be expected according to rational decision making. This project successfully achieved its primary objective - to identify and characterize the beliefs and decision making process of an important Chinese demographic using statistical analysis of responses collected through strategic, controlled, direct solicitation. The unique findings from this research provide critical context that can help reduce the chances of unnecessary conflict due to miscommunication, misunderstanding, and misinterpretation. These findings would be even more valuable if they were compared to those of an equivalent Western population.