Chapter 5: Theory 
This study investigates to what extent Confucian morality influences Chinese university students’ opinions about the use of force. Stated beliefs and views are tested for consistency and coherence with Confucian values. Ethical theories must be fairly broad in order to be useful for a wide range of situations but this also allows for numerous legitimate interpretations of what is moral while also not providing clear metrics for what falls outside of this spectrum. While the goal of this study is to validate the role of only Confucian ethical theory, the intricacy and diversity of human reasoning as well as the many potential sources of influence and bias complicate the creation of decision making models that are suitably comprehensive yet also necessarily succinct. This chapter outlines foundational concepts and defines critical terms of ethical theory and moral reasoning. It discusses which challenges/limitations must be addressed in order to ensure the legitimacy of the research and how the findings from prior studies have been incorporated into the survey design and statistical analysis to allay them. First, the current consensus about ethical theories and moral reasoning as well as how best to build quantitative models of them are reviewed. The same is then done for their relationship with international relations and foreign policy decisions. Finally, since most of these studies are based upon Western ethical theories and use Western respondents, the implications of cultural differences between Western and Asia are considered. Particular emphasis is given to how the findings from prior studies are used to improve the accuracy of the survey instrument, of analyzing the results from the survey, and of the models built from this analysis. This provides critical context to understand how the limitations of this project are mitigated. 
MORAL REASONING 
Mearsheimer says of theories about state behavior , “Normative theories can be valuable tools for understanding the constraints imposed on states by the international system, whether or not states actually heed them, and they can affect how states interact with each other”. Like other studies that seek to model moral decision making, this one uses the distinguishing characteristics of the established normative frameworks for the major Western ethical philosophies to categorize and scale the beliefs of respondents. It also considers how Confucian values might lead to important differences. The personal values and beliefs which comprise a normative system play a critical role in resolving moral conflicts - especially for situations where there is no way to sidestep the conflict. Schlenker and Forsyth suggest, and later studies support, that “an individual’s moral philosophy, or ethical ideology, is the key factor in ethical judgments”. This overarching system of beliefs creates an “ethical orientation” which “is the predisposition that influences an individual to distinguish right from wrong. It is a cognitive framework that affects…awareness of ethical issues, process of problem solving, choice of ethical principle, and administrative acts”. Guided by underlying ethical orientation or ideology, James Rest adds that the process of ethical behavior involves 1) moral sensitivity/recognition; 2) moral judgment or reasoning; 3) moral motivation/intention; and 4) moral character/action. Moral sensitivity is the awareness that the issue contains a moral problem. Moral judgment/reasoning is the process used to find the most moral way to resolve the moral problem. Moral motivation is the desire to actually do what has been identified as the best moral option – even when doing so is to the detriment of self-interest or expediency. Moral character is the ability to pursue doing the right option despite the substantial difficulties that may need to be overcome to do so. Schlenker and Forsyth were some of the first to explore the relationship between an individual’s moral philosophy and the extent to which their decisions are influenced by moral beliefs. They propose that the likelihood of an individual to choose the ethical option when faced with a conflict correlates with the degree to which that individual has both idealist and relativist beliefs about morality. Moral idealism measures the extent to which it is believed that upholding moral principles will lead to the best consequences. In other words, whether doing the morally right thing will lead to the morally right result. Moral idealists are more likely to identify, use, and strictly adhere to moral beliefs in their decisions and behavior. They also tend to be less tolerant of immoral behavior. The importance of moral beliefs and principles is primarily founded upon teleological14 considerations so it is logical that idealists also exhibit altruistic tendencies such as strong “concern for minimizing negative consequences and maximizing gain, particularly for others”. While idealism measures to what extent individuals believe that strictly following moral rules can ensure the best outcome, relativism is concerned with the universality and efficacy of moral rules to provide proper guidance for all moral conflicts. Strong relativists emphasize consideration of context and predicted moral or self-interested consequences rather than strict adherence to deontological universal moral rules. Relativists are also more likely to acknowledge that “in some cases harm is unavoidable, and that one must sometimes choose between the lesser of two evils”. Forsyth developed the Ethical Position Questionnaire to test where an individual fell on these scales. Although the EPQ is still used in many studies, Forsyth and others admit that results from it do not tell the whole story. As Forsyth et al. say,” Indeed, as cross-cultural psychologist Bond noted, to assume that a measure that was developed with U.S. citizens can be used without reservation with those with widely differing cultural backgrounds is imperialistic, particularly when researchers focus so exclusively on idealism and relativism that they ignore other, indigenous, aspects of morality that are unique to a given cultural context”. Thus, the idealist/relativist categorical distinction contributes valuable insights about the nature of moral beliefs but it presents an incomplete picture. To fill in important gaps, studies have sought to identify overarching ethical theories that likely “reflect high-level systemization of approaches already intuitively taken in everyday decision-making”. These deontological and teleological frameworks provide simplified guidelines for ensuring that the weighing of conflicting moral values is done with consistency and coherence. Studies have indeed found that “lay persons find the distinction between consequentialist and deontological considerations meaningful” and that even the deontological doctrine of double effect “can reliably influence moral judgments”. Deontological and teleological moral reasoning are fundamental characteristics of moral reasoning as they “are two nomothetic regularities that appear consistently across most people”. Testing for this distinction within a quantitative study of moral reasoning is further insightful because it has also been found that those who are more inclined to use deontological reasoning rather than teleological reasoning also demonstrate greater inclination towards choosing the moral option. This may, in part, be related to the finding that ethical decision making tends to place greater emphasis on the morality of how a goal is pursued than the morality of the actual goal. This study accordingly follows those others by creating conflicts between deontological and teleological principles to provide “a simple and clear measure of which principle an individual favors”. The survey also tests the requirement of consistency in moral reasoning by giving the same moral motive while varying which principle would justify the act. Because idealists are more likely to hold deontological beliefs while relativists are more likely to support teleological reasoning, this approach also addresses the idealist/relativist measures while better compensating for cultural bias. Normative ethical theory tells the individual how one ought to measure equally important but conflicting principles yet it does not help prioritize any moral value over another. For example, a deontologist would consider how to uphold moral duties rather than consequences but not whether honesty or filial piety is the more important duty. Thus, the ranking of values, where values are defined as “the individual’s prescriptive beliefs concerning the desirability of certain modes of conduct or end-states of behavior” , as well as the normative moral philosophy of the individual “plays a dominant role in making ethical decision”. Because moral values have an equal prima facie obligation to be upheld, there are many defensible ways to rank them. Lawrence Kohlberg suggests that the metrics used to rank values changes as an individual’s education and awareness of the world around them matures their moral philosophy. Following Plato, Kohlburg believes this process is essential to the discovery and pursuit of virtue – or what is the “ideal good”. The least sophisticated method for judging what is moral – or what is the ideal good – is to do so based upon how the consequences of their decision would impact that individual. As their concept of what is good/moral matures, their moral reasoning advances through Kohlburg’s six stages until, finally, morality is based upon justice. Said another way, there is a shift “from simpler, punishment-oriented thinking to more principled thinking” where upholding justice is the highest goal. According to Kohlburg, since it is the universal desire of all humans to discover the ideal good and since justice is universally that ideal, culture may influence the rate at which moral reasoning develops but the path and stages of moral development are the same for all. Yet this argument is predicated on a notion of justice that is defined by equality and reciprocity. As a result, Kohlberg’s scale and Rest et al.’s Defining Issues Test - upon which it is based - have received substantial criticism. The prioritization of the Western liberal notions of justice and the rights of the individual as the highest order values means that those who hold different views would be scored as having less mature moral reasoning according to the DIT. For example, some critics suggest that men are more inclined to evaluate ethical issues with the priority being justice while women are more inclined to account for situational context. Thus, Carol Gilligan, one outspoken critic, proposes an alternate ideal good that prioritizes considerations of care rather than justice. Some also believe that culture, language, and other contextual sources of morality are underappreciated. Relatedly, other critics point out that both Kohlberg and Gilligan’s notions from which morality is measured are similarly founded upon the individual as the basic unit of consideration and so fail to consider collectivist conceptions of morality that might prioritize “group-level concerns about social order, authority, duty, loyalty to one’s family or group,” etc.. Investigations into the possibility that differences in values may lead to divergent methods of moral reasoning have found that “ethical priorities, not wholly different sets of values, underlie the variations in ethical perception and judgment”. In particular, the list of values considered relevant to moral reasoning is found to remain largely the same across cultures but there is substantial variation of which values are deemed more important to be upheld or even considered. Even organizational culture effects the objective importance of upholding moral values – that is to say how important it is to actually do the right thing and choose the ethical option. One important way that organizations and communities legitimate and then promulgate what are normative values and how they should be used to address complex moral issues is by creating an ethical climate or culture that is purported to represent “social consensus”. As a result, studies of moral reasoning such as this one focus on how the ideologies of specific cultures or other organizational communities influence where values come from, how they are ranked, their role in moral decision making, and what other factors might influence this One of the earliest of such studies - and one of the most important to the validation of this theory - was done by Graham et al. In order to do this while accommodating cultural differences in how morality is defined based upon different ranking of values, they designed the Moral Foundations Questionnaire. The MFQ asks individuals to define their conception of morality by assigning relative importance to the five value pairings or “psychological “foundations” upon which cultures construct their moralities” - Harm/care, Fairness/reciprocity, Ingroup/loyalty, Authority/respect, and Purity/sanctity. These categories, importantly, account for a morality that prioritizes virtues over rules; the interests of the group over those of the individual; and emotional/intuitive over more systematic reasoning. Doing so is especially useful when building a common framework so as to compare the ethical priorities of collectivist and individualist as well Confucian belief systems. Indeed, results from the MFQ found that respondents from South, East, and Southeast Asia show more concern than those from Western cultures for the Ingroup and Purity values although they were about the same for Authority. Also, somewhat unexpectedly, the cross-cultural comparison of MFQ results found little difference between Asian and Western cultures in the importance assigned to Harm and Fairness. Other studies similarly found consistency in the moral reasoning and the ranking of values of a specific culture and systemic variation of these between cultures. Forsyth et al. believe that their Ethics Position Theory help explain these cultural variations. EPT breaks down an individual’s “ethical ideology” into four categories, defined by the individual’s beliefs and support for ethical relativism (“concern for principles”) and idealism. The collectivist emphasis on “relationships, with moral obligations based upon respect, trust, and a sense of community rather than general, cross-situational moral dictates” leads to the expectation that Confucian societies would fall more on Forsyth’s idealism side of the moral philosophy scale than Western individualist societies. At the same time, in comparison to Western society, the Asian/Confucian worldview is highly “contextual, relational, and dynamic but less dualistic and principle focused” – which creates the expectation of more relativistic views of moral principles. Cultures which have a more cynical, relativist view of morality should, logically, recognize moral ideals but should also be inclined to see these rules as neither universally applicable nor obligatory. In fact, cross-national studies using the EPQ show that China was below the overall mean for Idealism and above the mean for Relativism. This places them in the Forsyth et al.’s Ethics Position of “Subjectivism” where the “Individuals’ personal values and perspectives should guide their moral choices, rather than universal ethical principles or desire to achieve positive consequences”. In comparison, the US was about equally below the international mean for both idealism and relativism. The US was just slightly below China’s mean for idealism and well below China’s mean for relativism. This put the US in the ethics position of “Exceptionism” which is defined as “Individuals should act in ways that are consistent with moral rules, but one should remain pragmatically open to exceptions to these rules”. The US low score for idealism and for relativism demonstrates that there is stronger support for “self-expression values” than for “survival values” and greater prevalence of “individualism rather than collectivism”. China, with a low idealism score and a high relativism score, shows greater support for secular-rational values, low support for individualism, low tolerance for uncertainty, and an orientation to consider long term consequences. Despite improvements in the models of operable ethical systems and their underlying values as well as progress in understanding the roles of individual, situational, and organizational variables, it remains difficult to predict accurately or to explain the outcomes of actual moral reasoning seen in many studies. As Ieydjiev warns, it would be a mistake to conclude that irrational decision making is the cause for moral decisions that are not easily explained by existing models. Rather, the predictive model used failed to account for many potential sources of bias such as those from oversimplification, failure to remember all relevant details , to build simple frames for understanding complex situations, to overlook contradicting information in order to preserve their beliefs, to emphasise causal relationships over probability, to make fundamental errors in attributing purposeful behaviour to others, and to be heavily influenced by whether decisions are framed as gains or losses. The presence of others, social roles, emergencies and the stakes in the particular situation further interfere with the decision making process. Moreover, research has highlighted the crucial role of emotion in setting the agenda by focusing our attention , by influencing satisfaction from decisions and firmness of beliefs , and in acting as an alternative mechanism of taking decisions.. For example, the complexity of most ethical issues means that not all factors can be incorporated into the cognitive or intuitive reasoning process. Thus, it is believed that humans often tend to simplify the problem by subconsciously employing “an omission bias that filters out the unfamiliar or ambiguous factors from consideration”. Further guidance is often found by looking for “past normative behavior” that can help make moral decisions and can help develop moral “behavioral intentions”. This approach presents a simplified way to predict the possible outcomes of the options; it helps one behave in a consistent way that strengthens self-identification as a moral person; and it supplies advice by identifying a method for how, in the past, the desired result and moral behavior were achieved. Accordingly, previous experiences play a critical role in how moral conflicts are perceived and evaluated but they also create preconceived expectations that risk oversimplifying the conflict or overlooking important considerations. It is also suggested that individuals often turn to “socially recognized ideas and principles” - or social consensus – for guidance on complex moral issues but then find arguments of “rational reasoning” and moral justification to make the decision seem more legitimate. This makes it difficult to know if the explanations for the decision-making process upon which moral reasoning process theories are constructed and validated actually describe the process used or if the individual is simply couching their decision ex post facto in more acceptable language. As Watson summarizes, “a host of psychological factors have been shown to influence moral judgments and intentions: conscious moral rationality, subconscious intuitions, dispositional characteristics, situational contingencies, the health of the brain, issue-related factors, and dual or parallel processing theories”. How these factors interact and how they shape the path from normative theory to actual decisions is not yet fully understood. Yet, recent progress has been made on several fronts. To explain how these intuitive and cognitive components might work together in moral reasoning and, yet, why the same process may lead to different conclusions , Seiler et al. developed the Interactional Dual-Process Model of Moral Decision Making. The 5 components of the IDP are 1) Moral Perception; 2) Internal Dual-Process of Reasoning and Intuition; 3) Preliminary/Final Moral Judgment and Decision; 4) Post Hoc Reasoning; and 5) Social Interaction. The first component, moral perception, is comprised of the individual’s moral sensitivity and the perceived moral intensity of the conflict. The second component groups reasoning and intuition about the problem together because scientific studies “indicate that reasoning and emotions are indivisibly connected in the human brain”. There is much that is still not understood about the interaction between reasoning and intuition/emotion but there are indications that the extent to which each is used when considering a moral conflict is related to “the situation ,” “the problem at hand,” and the ease of which a person grasps the related issues. Studies in the field of neuroethics also support dual-process theory’s idea that intuition/emotion and cognition/rational reasoning both operate in moral reasoning. Neurocognitive science has found medical evidence from studying brain activity that reasoning is associated with “utilitarian moral judgment aimed at promoting the “greater good”” while the intuitive/emotional component is linked to “processing with deontological judgment aimed at respecting rights, duties, and obligations…that may trump the greater good”. It has also been found that moral dilemmas with which the individual feels a personal connection show less brain activity in the working memory and cognitive areas of the brain than for impersonal moral conflicts. Once reasoning and/or intuition arrives at a judgment and decision , post hoc reasoning - where “individuals continue to search for evidence to justify or change their initial judgment” - then occurs. Especially in professional situations, the fifth component, Social Interaction, then tests how other people react to the decision. Depending upon the feedback, the process may return to the earlier steps “in a recurring interaction loop”. “A final decision is reached only when this iterative process is terminated”. Models based upon dual process and parallel cognitive process theories agree that there is an inherent interplay between rational and intuitive inputs but “in the dual process model, rational moral reasoning generally occurs after a more intuitive and subconscious cognitive process has settled on an intention, or decision. In parallel cognitive processing both subconscious and conscious reasoning may be taking place contemporaneously”. Though the theories and models above help account for much of the variation in what is considered moral and why, they do not address why individuals would choose the ethical or unethical option. Studies of business ethics have found that individual factors that promote ethical or unethical decisions include the degree the respondent feels like they can control their lives, the extent to which they subscribe to a realist/Machiavellian or moral worldview, their moral philosophy, religion, and their stage of moral development. Results about the influence of age, gender, and nationality of the respondent is inconclusively mixed though there is some evidence that “age has a positive influence on ethical perceptions” while it “has a negative influence on ethical attitude”. The academic major and the “type of education” of the respondent has little effect on ethical reasoning but years of education, type of employment, and work experience do correlate. It has also been found that the amount of time the individual has worked in the field or with the company, the more professional responsibility they have, and the higher their income has a negative effect on their ethical attitude. Particularly relevant to this study is the finding that because “students and practicing business managers are comparable in their sensitivity to ethical issues in business decision-making” it is likely that students’ moral reasoning is sufficiently developed to represent a larger age population. The moral component of an issue is more likely to be an important consideration if one must choose between one’s own interests and those of others. The weight assigned to doing what is considered moral is also linked to the degree to which an individual believes they should and actually do behave morally (“self-concept”). Similarly, “moral judgments have been found to vary according to the role expectations we have of ourselves and others, as well as the specifics of the relationships between these roles”. For example, personal values becomes less influential if they conflict with an individual’s strong sense of organizational duty and responsibility or when there is “a conflict between individual values and organizational values”. The importance of moral considerations is not only affected by individual and organizational/cultural factors but also by those specific to the situation. The influential contextual factors are often collectively described as the moral intensity of the issue. This is sometimes grouped together with moral awareness - the recognition that there is a moral conflict. At the same time, results from multiple studies in business ethics strongly show that the individual’s values affect the perceived moral intensity of the situation. Thomas Jones proposes that there are six aspects of moral intensity – Magnitude of Consequences, Temporal Immediacy, Social Consensus, Proximity, Probability of Effect, and Concentration of Effect – that affect all four stages of Rest’s moral decision-making process. There is substantial support that organizational norms and severity of consequences correlate with choosing the moral option but less agreement about other factors. Some studies have found that the relationship between the respondent and the impacted individuals , how strongly the respondent identifies with the “other,” and the predicted amount of harm all strongly impact the importance of adhering to moral beliefs. Yet, there is mixed results about the importance of Probability of Effect and Proximity, Temporal Immediacy, and Concentration of Effect seem to have little impact. Additionally, while social consensus and consideration of consequences seems to have the strongest influence and the distance between the respondent and the effects of their decision have the least, “consequences are seen as more severe as proximity increases”. As complicated as moral reasoning is by itself, its relationship to actual behavior is even less studied and less clear. Studies “show only a moderate link between moral decision making and moral behavior” and it is not clear what factors influence this relationship. For example, the extent to which an individual shows consideration and sensitivity to the moral component of a problem does not correspond to more moral behavior. There is strong evidence that often people know what the morally correct thing to do is but they still don’t do it. Possible reasons why morality is not considered or followed include a lack of personal integrity and honesty , lack of moral motivation , low moral identity , a weak sense of moral agency, and little belief in the efficacy of morality. Other causes may be “extrinsic motivations, interpersonal relations, and personal preferences and interests ”. At the same time, the link between personal values, moral reasoning, moral intentions, and behavior has been found to be stronger “in high involvement situations such as ethical dilemmas”. Moral conflicts with higher stakes or where “individuals would be held accountable for their choices” also seem to increase the influence of personal values and encourage adherence to moral beliefs. Since a state’s use of force in pursuit of safety and security is an inescapable ethical dilemma with high stakes and accountability, it has the optimal conditions for values and intentions to guide behavior. 
CHINA, CULTURE, AND MORAL REASONING 
Identifying the extent to which Confucianism influences Chinese views of the use of force requires evaluating stated beliefs according to standards of rational, consistent, and coherent decision making but also considering the effect of the many possible sources of bias that threaten doing so. Another critical issue is how such analysis should account for differences between Western-based theories of ethics and moral reasoning and those from a non-Western culture such as China. Prior cross-cultural studies of moral reasoning suggest a number of ways that culture influences this process. Flaming, Agacer, and Uddin propose that “culture could be defined as the interactive aggregate of common characteristics that influence a human group’s response to its environment”. Kirkbride et al. provide the working definition that “culture is…at least in part, a system of shared values that both guides behavior and provides a means for constructing and attributing meaning”. Li, Triandis, and Yu expand that culture is “a shared pattern of categorizations, attitudes, beliefs, definitions, norms, values, and other elements of subjective culture”. These definitions of “culture” closely resemble that of “belief systems” – which are “interrelated sets of attitudes that incorporate many normative prescriptions”. Accordingly, identifying norms and attitudes regarding foreign policy and state behavior – including the permissibility of using force – are critical to uncovering the corresponding belief system and measuring the influence of culture on it. This is because “moral norms reflect one’s internalized moral rules” and indicate the normative philosophies that “provide material for meta-ethical reflections or second order thinking when an individual is trying to define moral theory”. Hunt and Vitell, who believe culture is a huge influence upon ethical decision making, argue that “cultural norms affect perceived ethical situations, perceived alternatives, perceived consequences, deontological norms, probabilities of consequences, desirability of consequences, and importance of stakeholders”. Hofstede , who similarly views culture as “the mental programming that distinguishes one group of people from another,” categorizes cultural norms according to 5 dimensions - power distance, uncertainty avoidance, individualism vs collectivism, masculinity vs femininity, and long-term vs short-term orientation. Yet cultural and other group norms, or “the rules that a group uses for appropriate and inappropriate values, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors” , may be based upon moral, amoral, or nonmoral goals. Social psychology’s theory of social learning is based upon the view that normative values and behavior are defined by and specific to what a community agrees is appropriate. However, others within the field of social psychology disagree about the source of moral norms. Cognitive development theory, such a Kohlburg’s theory of moral development stages and Rest’s DIT upon which it is based, believe that culture is much less important because norms evolve as the individual and their worldview and self- awareness mature. Instead, they assert that the developmental stages of moral norms are universal – even if not all people progress to all possible stages. Yet, the results of studies conducted in the collectivist or communalistic societies of Turkey, India, Papua New Guinea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong were found to not fit within Kohlburg’s model. Some critics use these results to support objections that Kohlburg’s model is based upon values and norms derived from Western individualistic, rational, and liberal conceptions of morality - which substantially differs from those found in Confucian collectivist morality. These fundamental differences are critical considerations for creating the survey instrument used in this study as well as for analyzing the derivative statistical models. A comparison of study results from the collectivist and individualist countries shows that moral development largely follows the same path for most cultures until around age 13. Most American subjects are in the 4th stage of Kohlburg’s model by 13 while the average age for Chinese respondents to be there is 18. Americans start moving to Stage 5 – where they begin “valuing social contracts, utility, and individual rights” – around 14 while Chinese respondents start around 20. No Chinese respondents were recorded in Stage 6 – which is the final stage. According to Kohlburg’s theory of moral development, it is not until the later stages of moral development that the consideration of justice exerts substantial influence on moral reasoning. Stage 6, in particular, requires that ethical principles are recognized as universal and applied as such in order for the decision to be just. Confucian justice fundamentally disagrees with the Western notion that a precondition for something to be moral is that it is “universal and reversible”. Instead, Confucianism holds that decisions about the distribution of resources are made and disputes are resolved by superiors and it is moral to favor those with whom there is a special relationship. Furthermore, Confucianism disagrees with the Western belief that the standards for determining what is just cannot change based upon contextual or situational bias. The inapplicability of Kohlburg’s theory to collectivist ethics thus stems from the fact that Kohlburg uses the Western conception of justice as the standard from which to measure moral reasoning. The root cause for this fundamental difference is that Confucian natural law comes from “natural duties and goals rather than on natural rights”. This conception of “natural law was based on social roles and statuses rather than on a notion of the individual who was prior to society”. Thus, “all people were not seen as morally equivalent”. One important implication of Confucian natural law being contrary to Western natural law is that while the belief that all humans inherently possess the same rights is fundamental to Western ethics, Confucian natural law holds that filial piety is actually a “mandatory unconditional positive duty”. Thus, at Stage 6, Kohlburg’s justice requires that “some non-relative values like life and liberty must be upheld in any society regardless of the majority opinion. This standard clearly reflects the Western value of individualism that considers the human rights of life and liberty to be non-relative values, while collectivist values or positive duties towards specific targets are disregarded as relative values”. That no Chinese respondents were recorded in this final stage provides more evidence that, as Hwang says, “The content of moral reasoning is very likely to be influenced by the normative philosophy of a given culture, especially in the later stages of development”. It also supports the idea that Confucian “core cultural ideas constitute the collective reality that is reflected in philosophical or ideological texts telling people what is good, what is moral, and how to be a person. They are transmitted to individuals through the social psychological processes of child-rearing practices, educational systems, customs, legal systems, and become the individual’s reality ”. Psychologists administered Rest’s DIT in Taiwan and Hong Kong to see if it would support the results about cultural differences in moral reasoning seen from the cross-cultural comparison of Kohlburg’s theory. The results showed that “though all samples showed increasing levels of principled judgment with higher age/education, Taiwan and Hong Kong samples tended to show a flatter rate of developmental increase than American samples”. In other words, age/education led to faster development in the use of principled reasoning in Americans than in Taiwanese and Hong Kong respondents. However, like Kohlburg’s use of the Western idea of justice as a critical metric, cross-cultural use of the DIT is also problematic due to the later stages of moral development being measured according to the Western concept of “absolute authority such as God or institutionalized legal authority”. 
BELIEFS, VALUES, MORALITY 
Western and Chinese standards of morality may rank the same values differently but many Confucian and Western normative beliefs can be distilled to very similar maxims. The Western “Golden Rule,” with its emphasis on reciprocity, is the fundamental basis for the normative morality of Just War theory. Though phrased more passively, Confucianism is also strongly based upon reciprocity. As written in the Confucian Analects,” Zi Gong asked, "Is there one word that can serve as a principle of conduct for life?" Confucius replied, "It is the word shu--reciprocity: Do not do to others what you do not want them to do to you””. As evidenced by their differing notions of justice, Confucian and Western cultures may view and apply reciprocity and other moral values in different ways. For example, some scholars assess “that the Chinese are highly “relativist” in their approach to decision making, that is, that there are not moral absolutes and ethical behavior depends upon the situation”. As a result, the Confucian notion of intentionality assumes greater importance. Yet, studies have also found that idealist consideration of others is less important and plays a smaller role in decision making for Chinese respondents than for their equivalents in the West. Instead, Chinese demonstrate greater consideration of self- interest and personal economic gain. Given these differences, Redfern and Kylie administered Forsyth’s Ethics Position Questionnaire to 115 business managers in the northern and southern regions of the PRC in order to test empirically the suitability of Western philosophical frameworks for understanding Chinese moral philosophies. The criteria used in Forsyth’s EPQ to test support for idealist views were found to be a valid measure for this aspect of moral philosophy for Chinese respondents though there were some criteria that the Chinese did not consider relevant to measuring this component of morality. Additionally, because the questions that test idealist beliefs do so in a way that closely resembles the Confucian virtue of ren, or benevolence, it is possible that demonstrated support for these values is due to overlapping Confucian values rather than due to agreement with the intended Western definition of idealism. The same study also found strong support amongst Chinese respondents for the validity and applicability of the EPQ’s relativist measure that “there are no universal truths” but, rather, every situation should be evaluated independently. However, there was another small but important difference in the interpretation of this moral component. Although the question in Forsyth’s test about whether morality should be based upon the weighing of the good and bad predicted consequences of the options is not intended to measure relativist beliefs, Chinese views about this utilitarian concept correlated to the test’s relativist questions. Redfern and Kylie posit that “this is consistent with the Confucian moral tradition that does not emphasize any ethical theory of hypothetical choices to determine action in each situation, but relies on situational intuitions of the xin which are harmonious with nature”. The implication is that Chinese generally hold relativist views and tend to evaluate morality of the situation using intuition and considering virtue while Western relativists rely more upon rationale and evidence to do so. Studies of ethics and counseling/clinical psychology in China further support this intuitive, contextual approach. One such study found that Chinese professionals strongly support common ethical principles - with the highest support for respect, responsibility, and justice - but, at the same time, “their ratings of ethical values fail to predict the result of their decision-making process in ethical dilemma scenarios”. Another study similarly found that respondents would often assess behaviors as unethical when considered in the abstract but, when given related real-world scenarios, they would consider the same actions ethical based upon the same moral principle. Qian et al. suggest that the emphasis on context and the apparent inconsistencies of Chinese values come from “the influence of Chinese culture, especially its emphasis on interpersonal relationship networks, mutuality, and reciprocality, as well as hierarchy and respect of authority, which are all salient features in collectivistic cultures such as China” Predictably but often not appreciated by either culture, “these cultural values may collide with ethical principles and standards that are widely accepted in individualistic cultures like the United States or European countries”. One important example is that the consideration of uncertainty does not seem to play a large role in the Chinese decision-making process but instead issues may be viewed “in absolutes”. This, in part, could contribute to why Chinese respondents were found to be more inconsistent and “more overconfident in their judgments”. Collectivist cultures have also been found to be more willing to take risks because, more confident that the community will assist them in event of failure, they perceive the same situations as less risky than Westerners. Especially compared to the Western individualist tradition, it is likely that the powerful influence of Confucian collectivist values includes strong expectations that its members will comply with group norms. For example, Triandis et al. used existing data from sources such as the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index and the Country Individualism Index to examine “the relationship between culture, personality, and deception in a simulated international management negotiation”. They found that “collectivist cultures are more corrupt than individualistic cultures”. However, the same study found that, when examining trends within any one Western or Asian country, people who are “independent as well as competitive” are also more likely to be corrupt because “highly competitive individuals must win at all costs”. In order to check if there really is a direct relationship between collectivism and corruption, Li et al. reexamine the data for Singapore. This demographic was selected because Chinese Singaporeans are more affluent than Chinese people in Hong Kong, Taiwan, or the PRC while they still have a “cultural orientation…consistent with that of other Chinese societies”. Additionally, Singapore is consistently one of the least corrupt countries in the world – and the only country with low corruption that does not have an individualistic culture. Using deception as a metric for corruption, Li et al. find that the results confirm its relationship with collectivism. Prior studies have also found that the degree of differentiation between in-groups and out-groups is strongly influenced by whether a culture holds collectivist or individualist values. Accordingly, Johnston investigates if there is a significant effect from Chinese collectivist ingroup/outgroup differentiation on views of international relations. This is done by conducting longitudinal analysis of questions that involve views of international relations and nationalism from the 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 Beijing Area Survey. Though the BAS covers a wide range of subjects and though there are a number of potential issues with the survey and its data, it is the best information that exists on these topics in China at the time. Johnston creates a new “othering” scale from existing scales in the BAS to measure the perceived difference between ingroup and outgroup identities. He finds that the Chinese respondents make substantial “ingroup-outgroup differentiation” where the ingroup is believed to be “much more peaceful and moral by nature than Americans and Japanese”. It should be noted that, though there are no cross-cultural comparisons that address this variable, studies of Western respondents also find that factors like the age of and the social distance to the affected people are important moral considerations. Testing the influence of the “political generation” in which the respondents grew up, those of the “post-Mao generation” were less likely to make strong ingroup-outgroup distinctions than those from the “pre-Deng generation”. On the other hand, there was no difference in “othering” between those of the pre-and post-Tiananmen generation. Johnston concludes that this does not support “the strong assumption in US policy and punditry discourse that younger Chinese are more nationalistic than older Chinese”. Johnston also finds that there is a statistically significant decrease in “othering” with higher education, that female respondents make stronger ingroup-outgroup distinctions between Americans and Chinese than male respondents, and that support for military spending correlated with stronger ingroup-outgroup distinctions. Though not directly linked with morality, Johnston finds that about 51% of respondents agree that “people should support their country even if the country is in the wrong”. Education but not gender was found to influence views about this. In a separate study, Johnston analyzes the responses from middle class participants of the 1998-2002 BAS to identify views of world affairs and international relations. He concludes that within this population “there is some evidence that there are coherent worldviews” and that” there are clusters of views that we would normally identity [sic] as internally consistent packages of beliefs about international relations”. Furthermore, the extent to which respondents hold beliefs that correspond to a realpolitik worldview decreases with greater education, income, and awareness of “world affairs”. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND FOREIGN POLICY DECISION MAKING 
Foreign policy and international relations decision making frequently involves difficult decisions such as how to balance the interests of one’s own state over other states, when is it acceptable to do harm in order to address concerns of safety and security, and other consequential issues that contain moral content. Many IR models – especially those of political realism – believe that state behavior (“foreign policy”) can be explained and predicted based upon rational and strategic pursuit of national goals (“international outcomes”). According to political realism, states will all similarly choose the option that logically best serves their self- interest – usually this is survival - which is often measured by power. This theory is based upon the assumption “that governments, and their political leaders, think and act in a rational manner in their quest for power and order. Such rationality assumes that individuals perceive the world accurately and arrive at decisions through an open intellectual process: goals are ordered, a search is made for relevant information, a wide range of alternatives is considered, and the option that maximizes the benefits while minimizing the costs is selected”. Other realists - such as Waltz - believe that because states too frequently act in “irrational" ways, “realism needs considerable help from other bodies of theories if it hopes to explain state behavior as well as international outcomes”. Similar criticisms have been made about the ability of elite political decision makers to make rational decisions consistently. Not only is the rationality of decisions limited by complex, uncertain, and ambiguous situations but, as seen from the cognitive and social psychology studies of moral reasoning above, there is a great deal of evidence that moral decision making, itself, is complex and susceptible to many sources of potential bias. Furthermore, numerous scholars believe that “Western rationality” is very different than Chinese “ways of thinking”. Chinese subjectivist and relativist inclinations that suggest a more intuitive approach to reasoning, thus, further emphasizes caution about the applicability of rational actor theory to Chinese strategic behavior. The net result is that, although moral reasoning and political decision making are, indeed, guided by the desire for consistency and rationality, as experts such as Graham Allison, Janice Strein, and Robert Jervis say, “It is often impossible to explain crucial decisions and policies without reference to the decision-makers’ beliefs about the world and their images of others”. For the purpose of this study, a belief system is “an empirically verifiable configuration of ideas and attitudes connected in some organized manner that is stable and general enough to provide an individual broad guidance on more specific matters”. Attitude is defined as “a predisposition toward and object or a policy”. Beliefs act “as a causal nexus – that is, as a filter through which other factors pass…beliefs are naturally positioned between the environment and behavior” and serve as a “mental model” to “help order the world”. Beliefs about how the real world operates– “which are assumptions about the nature of the international system” – often conflict with beliefs about what is moral – which are based upon the ideal world. “Specific attitudes may be generated through interactions between reality beliefs and normative beliefs. An individual’s specific attitudes can, in turn, lead to intentions to behave, and eventually these intentions may lead to actual behaviors”. In fact, research shows that the individual’s fundamental moral “values ” play a large role in “belief systems” and are linked to “policy goals, preferences, and interpretations” as well has how foreign policy should be conducted. The “core values are an important foundation of…foreign-policy postures” and these postures “are crucial considerations in guiding an individual’s preferences on a variety of concrete issues in foreign affairs”. Keohane and Goldstein dig deeper into the role and nature of beliefs in order to understand how they lead to decisions and behavior. They propose that there are three kinds of guiding beliefs - casual beliefs, principled beliefs, and worldviews. Causal beliefs “suggest actual strategies;” principled beliefs provide the standards of what ought to be done; and worldviews are the overarching models of international behavior in which causal and principled beliefs operate. Causal and principled beliefs are often collectively shared within a community and the worldviews of at least the elite seem to primarily come from “formal study and socialization with other policymakers”. Causal and principled beliefs combined with assumptions about the character of the international system and state behavior create a worldview that provides basic guidelines for understanding observed behavior. “Beliefs set up expectations, and when an event occurs, we are likely to interpret the event in relation to our expectations”. For example, elite decision makers “are profoundly colored by psychological and political assumptions they hold concerning the most effective strategies for eliciting desired responses from other states and the nature of other states and the probable responses of other states”. Additionally, beliefs about international relations and those of foreign policy have been found to be related to the level of endorsement of broad international security concepts – especially deterrence and détente. Further support for the role of and relationship between the three categories of guiding beliefs is found in the results of ethical decision-making studies for fields other than foreign policy. One study, which focused on the role of ethics in American marketing, found that those who showed low support for a Machiavellian worldview and a strong locus of control more strongly endorsed deontological norms. A different study using the same data set found that those with strong Machiavellian views “perceived ethical problems as less serious and were unlikely to view punishment of unethical behavior as a viable alternative” Lastly, it was found that members of organizations that “strictly enforced their code of ethics…were more influenced by deontological considerations in forming their intentions to intervene and were less influenced by teleological considerations” Within business culture, frequent and “early exposure to poor ethical practices, apparently, undermines subsequent ethical decision making”. Also, attitudes like agreeableness, openness, anxiety, and conscientiousness have little effect on ethical decision making while character traits like cynicism and trust do. Though these were studies of business culture, the fundamental issues are sufficiently similar to international relations to believe that, in both environments, “cynical individuals who do not trust others are especially prone to make unethical decisions, perhaps as a self-protection strategy. Moreover…narcissism, an overinflated sense of self-worth, was found to be negatively related…to ethical decisions”. The findings from other general studies of ethical decision making are relevant to how beliefs from worldviews likely influence foreign policy and strategic behavior. They also point out possible areas on which to focus to encourage foreign policies that emphasize morality. For example, studies have found that normative behavioral traits like honesty have a positive relationship with ethical decision making while ambition has a negative one. Similarly, a study of integrity and doctoral students found that “selfishness,” “avoidance of responsibility,” and “deception” (“unwilling to trust others”) have a negative relationship with ethical decisions while “seeking help” and “involving others” has a positive one. It is prohibitively time consuming and difficult to consider and weigh all the relevant causal beliefs, principled beliefs, and worldviews when faced with complicated issues. Studies in social psychology find that “people tend to be theory driven in their beliefs about the world”. This may be taken to the extreme where decisions are based upon theory without proper consideration of the actual facts of the specific situation. However, since the set of beliefs within an IR theory strongly influence the creation of agenda and policy, they “can profoundly structure outcomes, set out roadmaps to avoid uncertainty and affect strategic interactions”. Though perhaps not as sophisticated as many policy elite, there is evidence that even normal people “foreign-policy attitudes function this way and so have been found to be substantially more organized” than originally thought to be. It is still quite difficult to identify “the perceptions and motives of a nation’s leaders”. This is partially because it is not easy to fit messy reality neatly within any theory. Also, elites tend not to use only very general outlines of IR theory to guide decisions because they must also consider the practicalities of complex and nuanced actual governance. Social cognition theory and schema theory both suggest that humans have a general inclination to make these kinds of complex decisions by distilling the quandary into a few basic issues and schema - the more complex the situation, the more this is done. Elite decision makers and normal individuals rely upon core values and heuristics derived from theory rather than specific situational details to form attitudes and preferences. In fact, there is strong empirical evidence that “humans are “cognitive misers” who show a marked preference for simple, low- effort heuristics that permit them to make up their minds quickly, easily, and with confidence in the correctness of the stands they have taken”. Heuristics such as moral proverbs, commandments, maxims, and simple directives like The Golden Rule represent entire moral attitudes and many consider them an effective way to “focus people’s moral judgments in applied policy contexts”. Even “Aquinas…held that its [Just War Theory] underlying moral rules could be understood and even discovered by “ordinary folk” through the application of simple reasoning”. The heavy reliance upon heuristics has the added benefit of making the use of specific questions that target one or two fundamental principles sufficiently accurate for discerning operable moral beliefs and their relative importance. Cognitive perception and analysis of moral conflicts – or how situations are simplified and what heuristics are selected – “are a result or a consequence of psychological and ideological constraints, different beliefs and values, misperceptions, emotions, framing effects, loss aversion” and other personal preferences. As a result, there are a number of common cognitive biases to rational decision making that come from trying to simplify complex issues. They include drawing “simplistic, superficial, and biased” lessons in an effort to find guidance from analogous situations in the past, avoiding situations where difficult value trade-offs must be made, sticking with an incorrect decision once committed to it, incorrectly attributing external or internal causes to explain actions, and poor judgment under stressful crisis conditions. Further cognitive bias comes from distortion of how the situation is perceived and interpreted in order to ensure that reality matches held beliefs and to ensure that responses to moral issues remain consistent. Watson et al. summarize, “Even though situations may differ, there is evidence that we look for commonalties to support a selected behavior”. Reliance on theory is so strong that people are often found to be “relatively impervious to new data” that might call its applicability into question. So much so that it is unlikely that belief systems will change even when presented with substantial evidence to the contrary. Instead, the contradictory information is discarded and the evidence is reexamined to locate more supportive evidence. Moral reasoning is often adjusted in order to justify prioritizing the moral principles that best support primary goals or values as well as the in-group. The information determined relevant to the situation tends to also be selected according to what best supports the preferred theories and beliefs about international relations. Policy elites, who “remain remarkably theory driven in terms of that data is organized and assimilated into existing belief structures,” are no less prone to such biases of information selection and theoretical options. The desire to do what is intuitively believed to be morally correct or morally motivated biases moral decision making in other ways as well. The use of a very small number of simplified moral precepts to resolve simplified moral problems imbues the operable moral value with greater importance. As a result, broad and general moral rules may be used to conclusively define what is “right” without also considering the specifics of the actual unique situation. The motivation to do what has been deemed moral “can influence not only our descriptive beliefs about how the world is...but also prescriptive beliefs about how the world ought to be”. For example, studies have shown that in America, “political orientation and moral beliefs are deeply connected” – even as applied to the use of force. Thus, it becomes morally correct or even morally obligatory to build a world based upon these political beliefs. The use of force, a moral issue, is more easily employed to pursue such goals when it is backed by such moral justification. One way this occurs is that policy elites tend to consider difficult decisions by distilling the “goals, constraints, preferred solutions, and expectations of various tactics” according to their beliefs until the situation fits within their, generally speaking, realist or liberal worldview. Even a poll of prior members of the US military found that their views about war were most strongly related to their political beliefs. Political orientation and the resulting worldview even influence the actual process of moral reasoning. Politically conservative military veterans were found more inclined to consider morality based upon overarching rules of conduct while those with liberal political views were more inclined to look at the specifics of each individual situation. The same is true for the general population. A study that polled undergraduate students found that political conservatives show greater support for consequentialism and, as logically expected, less concern for collateral damage than political liberals. Conservatives felt that the importance of a moral principle was strongly determined by the specifics of the situation while liberals did not see the legitimacy of moral constraints as contextual. For example, conservatives showed stronger support for “consequentialist military action” and less consideration for collateral damage when the victims’ were Iraqi rather than American.. Humans show strong bias to fit situations and adjust reasoning to preexisting beliefs, worldviews, and goals but also in how one interprets their own behavior as well as that of others. According to studies of attribution theory, people are more likely to give credit to external conditions to explain or justify their own less-than-ideal actions while they often downplay the role of external conditions when explaining the behavior of others. The same bias is extended to those with whom there is a close relationship. Replacing the “individual” with the “state,” the same attribution bias has been found to exist within international relations. Some argue that the differing hierarchy of values found in Confucian collectivist thought means that there is a different kind of attribution bias than what is explained by Western individualist-based attribution theory. Liu and Zhao support this claim using evidence from previous studies which indicate “Western cultures promote that dispositional explanations of behavior are preferred [sic], whereas East Asian cultures tend to encourage both dispositional and situational explanations of behavior ”. They further argue that the Confucian emphasis on harmony and emotion, its preference for “rule of man” rather than “rule of law” (where “group and leaders have the ability to decide your fate of career”), and its collectivist values of family and community rather than Western “self-value” biases Chinese people to attribute their success to external factors such as their community and close relations. They also claim that when others fail, Chinese people are likely to attribute this to fate or luck rather than to their own doing. Despite the many possible sources for bias in moral reasoning and foreign policy decision making, the expectation of and desire for consistency and coherence is universal and, thus, its presence will be apparent in patterns of decisions and behavior. Even the factors that create biases must do so with consistency in order to be noticed and considered influential. As a result, studies of social cognition theory suggest that otherwise unexplainable apparent contradictions or incoherence is often due to the outside observer not fully comprehending how an individual’s complete belief system is “fragmented internally, with different belief systems or schema being invoked under different situations for making sense of the environment”. Though “individuals bring different rules, criteria, and processes to bear in different policy domains” , studies have found there to be compartmentalized but strong consistency between overarching, abstract beliefs and the more specific related policies endorsed. This is even more likely if the individual’s belief system has already developed from experience and/or expertise in similar situations. The proclivity to use a few, simple theoretical heuristics to characterize morally- complex situations and to decide what the appropriate response ought to be means that the preferences and fundamental beliefs elucidated from a survey, writings, or behavior are useful for understanding a wide range of foreign policy views and preferences. The desire for consistency and prior knowledge of common sources of bias make efforts to model moral decision making more achievable. 
SUMMARY 
Studies of moral reasoning show that an individual’s moral philosophy can be placed within an established ethical theory based upon the relative weight of principles/values and whether the option with the best consequences or right behavior determines what is moral. Such efforts need to consider how cultural differences such as those that derive from collectivist and individualist societies may create different norms and ranking of values. For example, China may not behave as predicated according to a Western expectation of the rational state actor. Whether common sources of bias can explain patterns of inconsistent or incoherent decisions must be tested before concluding that morality does not play a significant role in decision making. Identified preferences and beliefs should be tested for individual, organizational, and situational factors which have been shown to encourage or discourage choosing the moral option. Cross-cultural studies have identified a number of important differences between Chinese Confucian collectivist values and those promoted in Western individualist societies. Dramatically different notions of justice, which disagree about the requirement for universality and reversibility, ultimately derive from a different conception of natural law. Thus, while both cultures share similarities such as a moral emphasis on reciprocity, the Chinese are more likely to be more contextual, intuitive, and preferential when making moral decisions. Yet, the values, beliefs, and principles prioritized and considered normative are closely related to views of state behavior, the goals for foreign policy, preferences for pursuing these goals, and the role of morality within the decision-making process. It is possible to use a questionnaire to examine these issues – especially because humans simplify morally-complex situations according to heuristics that represent their general theories of the world and of morality. Modelling belief systems and worldviews is made easier because cognitive bias emphasizes and highlights the values and issues considered most important and, thus, influential. China’s collectivist emphasis on compliance with group norms make them more obvious as well.