Title: China's Real Strategic Culture: A Great Wall of the Imagination 
Author: Andrew Scobell 

Abstract: The Great Wall is frequently held up as the most striking symbol of the potency of a persistent Chinese pacifist, non-expansionist, defence-minded strategic stance. But how accurate is this ‘Great Wall’ depiction of China’s strategic culture? What is the impact of this depiction on China and the Asia-Pacific region? While the Great Wall is an apt symbol of a romanticized image of Chinese strategic culture, the reality behind the genesis of this impressive fortification and the accompanying pervasive belief in a monistic strategic tradition is that they are figments of the collective contemporary Chinese imagination. Nevertheless, these formidable myths exert real influence on two ‘faces’ of strategic culture. The first face refers to how leaders and society perceive the policies and actions of their own country. The second face, routinely neglected, refers to how leaders and society in one state perceive the policies and actions of an adversary or potential adversary state, which, like the first face, is constructed out of myth. The impact of these two faces on the Asia-Pacific region exacerbates the region’s security dilemma, adversely impacting China’s relations with other countries, notably Japan and the United States. 
Culture has long been considered a key dimension in explaining and interpreting China’s security policy and military strategy. Many scholars of history and international politics have emphasized the impact of thousands of years of Chinese civilization and highlighted the pervasive influence of Confucianism on China’s foreign and defence policies. Moreover, contemporary Chinese analysts and strategists fervently assert the centrality of culture in guiding the security policy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) since its founding in 1949. The result is a presumption that the PRC possesses a monistic strategic culture which avers war, is predisposed to a defensive military posture, and stands in stark contrast to the bellicose and aggressive strategic cultures of many other countries. 
   The Great Wall is frequently held up as the most striking symbol of the potency of a persistent pacifist, non-expansionist, defence-minded strategic stance. But how accurate is this ‘Great Wall’ depiction of China’s strategic culture? What is the impact of this depiction on China and the Asia-Pacific region? While the Great Wall is an apt symbol of a romanticized image of Chinese strategic culture, the reality behind the genesis of this impressive fortification and the accompanying pervasive belief in a monistic strategic tradition is that they are figments of the collective contemporary Chinese imagination. Nevertheless, these are both formidable myths that exert real influence on two ‘faces’ of strategic culture. The first face refers to how leaders and society perceive the policies and actions of their own country. The second face, routinely neglected, refers to how leaders and society in one state perceive the policies and actions of an adversary or potential adversary state, which, like the first face, is constructed out of myth. The impact of these two faces on the Asia-Pacific region is especially worrisome because it exacerbates the security dilemma dynamic adversely impacting China’s relations with other countries, notably the United States and Japan. 
   This article proceeds by critically analysing the Great Wall symbol of Chinese strategic culture as a pacifist, non-expansionist, and defence-minded strategic stance. It surveys the historical development of Chinese strategic thinking and describes the ‘keepers’ of strategic culture today. The article explores the impact of strategic culture on specific dimensions of security policy, and then, inspired by the introductory article, turns to the broader question of the potential for development of a pan-Asian or regional strategic culture identity to confront contemporary challenges. 
Understanding History 
Dominant Western scholarly interpretations of Chinese history and politics have long highlighted the political dimensions of that country’s culture and civilization, while focusing relatively limited attention on military matters. The writings of prominent historians such as John K. Fairbank and Mark Mancall tended to emphasize the non military side of Chinese history, civilization, and culture. It was not until the 1990s that a sizable body of work on matters of violence, warfare, and strategy was published by Western sinologists. These books on societal violence, myths about violence and defence policies, and grand strategies of dynasties began to challenge the orthodox view of a dominant pacifist Confucian civilization. 
   Many analysts invoke the words ‘strategic culture’ or adopt an explicitly cultural approach and proceed to engage in blanket stereotyping about a particular country or society. The term ‘strategic culture’ was not used in studies of Chinese strategy or warfare until 1988, but mainstream scholarship presumed that China’s Confucian tradition was a key determining factor in Chinese strategic thinking. Because of Confucianism, in this interpretation China tended to favor harmony over conflict and defence over offence. Other analysts, usually focusing on Sun Zi’s Art of War, have stressed a Chinese predisposition for stratagem over combat and psychological and symbolic warfare over head-to-head combat on the battlefield.  
   These approaches are similar to the ‘national character’ approach which, when applied to China by Westerners, might be summarized as follows: ‘Chinese tend to emphasize stratagem over brute force’. When applied to China by Chinese, a national character approach might be summarized as follows: ‘The Chinese people have always dearly loved peace’ or ‘China opposes the offensive use of force’, or even ‘China is predisposed to surprise first strikes’. Such statements are often supported by quoting Sun Zi or with reference to Confucius. At worst, sloppy scholarship gives cultural approaches a bad name; at best this type of work tends to engage in dead-end circular logic. Again, if applied to China, the assertion would be along the following lines: ‘Chinese act like this because this is how Chinese act’. In short, often the simplistic assumption was that countries possess a single, easily identifiable, and unified strategic culture. 
   With the 1995 publication of Alastair Iain Johnston’s pioneering work Cultural Realism: Strategic Culture and Grand Strategy in Chinese History, strategic cultural approaches to China gained more respect. This more nuanced and careful study received considerable fanfare and acclaim. Since then other works have utilized the strategic culture approach, including this writer’s China’s Use of Military Force: Beyond the Great Wall and the Long March (2003). A significant number of volumes, journal articles, and book chapters have been published that focus on China and invoke the term, but their depth of coverage varies widely.  
   Building on the scholarship of Alastair Iain Johnston and my own earlier work, I define strategic culture as ‘the set of fundamental and enduring assumptions about the role of collective violence in human affairs and the efficacy of applying force interpreted by a country’s political and military elites’. This is broadly consistent with prevailing approaches to strategic culture, as outlined in the introductory article. This conception characterizes culture as part context and part lens – something that shapes the menu of options available to an actor in various situations as well as affects an actor’s perceptions or images of self and others. Indeed, the presence of strategic culture can be so all-pervasive that its existence is not even noticed or its impact is not even recognized. Moreover, assumptions based upon it may be so readily accepted that the stereotypes or biases it produces are not even challenged or questioned. My psycho-cultural approach is perhaps most similar to what Johnston dubs the ‘second generation’ of strategic culture scholarship and the work of international relations scholars such as Robert Jervis.  
Demolishing a Wall and Constructing a Cult 
The scholarship of historian Arthur Waldron has laid bare the myth of a Great Wall the origins of which date back to the Emperor Qin Shihuang, widely considered the first emperor to unify China in 221 BCE. Waldron’s meticulous research revealed that what we now think of as the Great Wall only dates back to the Ming dynasty (1368– 1644). While numerous dynasties have engaged in the construction of walls, there was never a single fortification stretching from Central Asia in the far west to Shanhaiguan on the eastern coast. Moreover, successive dynasties did not exhibit a cultural proclivity for static defences although many dynasties constructed fortifications. Indeed, wall building in the Ming dynasty was actually the result of political compromise. In the 1470s, China faced a threat from Mongol nomads living in the Ordos region of Central Asia and the Ming court explored various policy options. Although an offensive strategy had appeal, military expeditions were risky with soldiers and horses in short supply. The Ming court adopted a positional defence policy and commenced building its wall.  
   Meanwhile, the scholarship of political scientist Alastair Iain Johnston under mined the myth of a single Confucian strategic tradition extending back more than 2,000 years. Focusing on the Ming dynasty, Johnston identified the existence of two strands of Chinese strategic culture: a ‘Parabellum’ (or Realpolitik) one and a‘Confucian-Mencian’ one. Moreover, he concluded that of these two strands, only one – the Realpolitik strand – was operative and the second was purely for ‘idealized discourse’. Other research emphasizes the influence of an array of traditions such as legalism and Daoism as well as popular myths and folk traditions.  
   This author’s own research also discerns the existence of two strands of Chinese strategic culture but, unlike Johnston, I argue that both the Realpolitik and Confucian Mencian strands are operative. In fact, the two strands interact in a dialectic fashion to produce a distinctive ‘Chinese Cult of Defence’. The outcome is that Chinese elites fervently believe that China is under the sway of a unique peace-loving, non-expan sionist, defensive-minded strategic tradition. Because of the interaction between different strands of strategic culture and the way China’s strategists define ‘defence’, virtually any use of force by China is defensive in nature. Thus, paradoxically China is more disposed to use force when confronting a political-military crisis than it might otherwise be. Johnston’s research suggests that China is a Realpolitik power that historically has not shrunk from using force. This writer’s own research has expanded upon Johnston’s basic findings, suggesting that while China’s elites view the world in Realpolitik terms, at the same time they perceive China’s own strategic culture as Confucian or pacifist and defensive-minded. 
   The Cult of Defence identifies six principles that influence the decision-making of Chinese elites: (1) the primacy of national unification; (2) heightened threat perceptions; (3) the concept of active defence; (4) Chinese just war theory; (5) domestic chaos phobia; and (6) an emphasis on the welfare of the community over that of the individual. The combined effect of these principles is a predisposition by China to resort to force in a crisis, a marked tendency towards risk-taking, and justifications of the use of force in terms of the big picture. 
   Under the influence of the Cult of Defence, Chinese civilian and military leaders perceive their use of military force as extremely limited. They firmly believe that Beijing only turns to military force with great reluctance and with far less frequency than leaders in other capitals around the world. Chinese elite thinking on the use of force can be summed up in the following tongue-in-cheek mantra: ‘Use force sparingly; repeat as often as needed’. In addition, the record of communist China’s use of force since 1949 reveals a disturbing habit of calculated risk-taking. While Chinese leaders do not use force lightly or without a considerable amount of thought, they are prone to believe that calculated risks are worth taking. They seem confident that China can ensure escalation control by strictly limiting the scale, area, and timing of its application of military power. Moreover, when Chinese look at their record of the use of force, they conclude there has been a 100 percent success rate.  
   Finally, when Chinese leaders deliberate about when and how to use force, they do not think in terms of operational victory. For them, the criterion of success is the impact of the operation on the ‘overall situation’. If they can conclude that China has bought some time and deterred an adversary from committing future acts of aggression, they feel the operation was justified. Thus, if Chinese displays of armed force, such as the Sino-Soviet border clash of 1969 and the Vietnam border war of 1979, are judged to have deterred the Soviet Union and/or Vietnam from further campaigns of military adventurism, then the price in blood and treasure was worth it. Put another way, Chinese leaders tend to conclude that if China had not used military force, the situation would have worsened.  
Keepers, Artifacts, and Narratives 
The keepers of strategic culture in China today are many, as are the artifacts of culture. These keepers include not just elites but society at large. Political leaders, military brass, and strategic thinkers in academia and research institutes are central players in China’s strategic culture narrative. They generate, control, and interpret it. For example, in the post-Mao reform era since the 1980s, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has rediscovered China’s rich cultural heritage. But this cultural reawakening was carefully orchestrated by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership as a way to bolster their sagging political legitimacy. Glorifying China’s past strongly implied that the CCP were the rightful heirs to a long and distinguished succession of Chinese dynasties. There may be no better symbol of this process than the official rehabilitation of Confucius and the revival of Confucianism. During the era of Mao Zedong (1949– 1976) the man and his philosophy were mercilessly attacked as backward and feudal. Both are not only back in favour today, but prominently propagated by CCP leaders. Indeed, party officials regularly cloak their rhetoric in relation to Confucian values. Confucian temples have been refurbished, classes in Confucianism are well subscribed, and Confucius Institutes – funded by the PRC Ministry of Education – are proliferating across the globe.  
   Meanwhile, the most prominent artifacts of strategic culture are classic works of strategy and statecraft or official doctrine, and it is upon these texts that scholars such as Alastair Iain Johnston have largely focused. For his study of the Ming, Johnston looked at the seven military classics, including Sun Zi’s Art of War, which were combined into a single corpus of work in 1083. For Johnston’s later study of strategic culture in Mao Zedong’s China, he examined Mao’s military writings. Scholars who examine the writings of influential strategists have concentrated on what has been called the ‘great tradition’ or ‘high culture’, and all but ignored the arena of popular culture or what has been called the ‘little tradition’ (see below). 
   Certainly, in post-Mao China official documents and authoritative military writings are quite numerous and readily accessible to scholars and analysts inside and outside of China. Some of the most accessible sets of documents are the biannual PRC defence white papers. There have been eight iterations of the white paper, each published in Chinese and English. These are propaganda, of course, but they also represent authentic and authoritative articulations and rationalizations of PRC official policy and People’s Liberation Army (PLA) doctrine. Indeed, the lead drafters of the official document are researchers at the Academy of Military Sciences (AMS), China’s most important think-tank on matters of strategy and doctrine, which answers directly to the Central Military Commission (China’s equivalent of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff). The document is also coordinated with high-level civilian entities. Probably the most authentic version of this document was the first white paper issued in 1998. Subsequent iterations became more polished and increasingly steeped in the jargon of international relations theory. Other authoritative writings include volumes and journals published by the AMS Press and National Defense University Press. Books by PLA strategists, such as Science of Strategy and Science of Campaigns, and articles in journals such as China Military Science, provide valuable insights into high-level Chinese military discourse and logic.  
   Most societies possess rich and varied folk traditions with graphic depictions of war and violence and replete with colorful heroes and powerful symbols. These traditions greatly influence members of a society as they develop and imbue them with values, ideals, and images that are likely to remain with them for the rest of their lives. This is certainly true in China where classic dramas, legends, and novels often drawn from ancient Chinese history are well known to most Chinese. One of the most famous of these is the epic Romance of the Three Kingdoms, a novel com piled more than 600 years ago from much older oral accounts. Just as popular but of more recent vintage are wartime films, dramas, and soap operas that seem to play incessantly on Chinese television. Many are set in the era of the so-called ‘Anti-Japanese War’ during the 1930s and 1940s when Japan invaded and occupied vast areas of China. Not surprisingly, Japanese soldiers are cast as villains while Chinese Communist resistance fighters often play the heroic roles. 
   These domestic myths, symbols, and historical memories have a significant impact on a country’s strategic culture and are significant in shaping the narrative. This is especially the case since most states consider national security to encompass internal and as well as external threats. For example, after 11 September 2001, the United States is much more focused on domestic threats to security. But even before this there were significant deployments and employments of military force internally and in border and frontier areas in American history. Scholars who ignore intrastate and societal violence risk missing an important piece of the puzzle. Of particular note is the domestic use of military force; in many countries soldiers are routinely deployed/employed internally to deal with riots, rebellions, and insurgencies. This is certainly true for China. In the decades since the founding of the PRC in 1949, the PLA has been employed to deal with social upheaval on a massive scale in the late 1960s (soldiers restored order following the most tumultuous phases of the so-called Cultural Revolution) and in 1989 the PLA was used to suppress popular protests in Beijing (culminating in the violent crackdown in the Chinese capital on the weekend of 3 – 4 June). Since then Chinese leaders have made a sustained effort to use the paramilitary People’s Armed Police (PAP) as the shock troops to deal with domestic unrest. For example, the most serious episode of domestic unrest since 1989 was in the capital of the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region in July 2009, and was suppressed by the PAP with at least some level of support from the PLA.  
   The dominant strategic culture narrative is of a weak and defenceless China exploited and violated by more militarily potent and aggressive Western powers. While China was technologically inferior to these oppressors, keepers argue that it was morally and ethically more highly evolved. According to the narrative, European states were driven by a culture of violence and materialism, whereas China was governed by a culture that stressed harmony and spiritual fulfillment. The Chinese narrative not only includes Britain, France, and Germany among the mix of Western imperialists but also the United States and Japan. While Americans like to think of themselves as qualitatively different from old world European empire-builders with regard to their interactions with Asia, Chinese tend to lump them all together as unethical and focused on military means to achieve material gains. For all intents and purposes, the so-called ‘open door policy’ put Washington on the same level as London, Paris, and Berlin in Chinese eyes. Indeed, the United States along with six other Western countries and Japan sent troops to lift the siege on the foreign legation in Beijing in 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion. This episode is an important piece of the greater Chinese narrative.  
   Justice may be on the side of the oppressed, but China had to become a rich country with a strong army to obtain it. For China this self-strengthening did not happen fast enough and Japan became the first Asian state to successfully modernize. By the time of the Boxer Rebellion, Japan had turned from a tributary state of China and a mimic of Chinese civilization to a bully that preyed on Chinese resources and seized Chinese territory. A landmark event was the Sino-Japanese War of 1894 – 1895 in which Tokyo soundly defeated Beijing and annexed the island of Taiwan.  
   While the Kuomintang (KMT) or Nationalist Party under Sun Yat-sen claimed to be the movement that would save China, it proved incapable of winning the hearts and minds of the Chinese people and of defeating Japan. After gradually absorbing more and more Chinese territory over several ‘peacetime’ decades, Japan finally declared war on China in 1937 and seized its major cities and remaining coastal areas. The late 1930s and early 1940s was a critical period for the growth in power and influence of the CCP. Indeed, the CCP propagandists skilfully portrayed the communist movement and its associated military forces as China’s heroic vanguard in the so-called ‘Anti-Japanese War’. The CCP and its army, led by Mao Zedong and Zhu De, respectively, became awe-inspiring organizations spearheaded by super-patriots. After victory over the Japanese, the CCP went on to soundly defeat the corrupt and incompetent KMT. The creation of immaculate reputations at the time, and remark able myth-making during the intervening years, are the results of highly skilled propagandists spinning and re-spinning a powerful narrative that is both extremely consistent and adaptive to new media and eras.  
Strategic Culture and Chinese Security Policy 
What is the actual impact of strategic culture? How exactly does strategic culture affect behaviour? As noted above, the major effect is the context in which national leaders make decisions and the lens through which a country’s civilian and military elites perceive themselves and their own actions as well as those of their counterparts in other countries. The former, which I dub the ‘first face of strategic culture’, is concerned with a country’s self-image – the perceptions and realities of its own dominant strategic traditions and how these interact and produce outcomes. The latter, or the ‘second face of strategic culture’, involves the image constructed in the minds of these leaders regarding another country’s dominant strategic traditions. These images are ‘the preconceived stereotype of the strategic disposition of another nation, state, or people that is derived from a selective interpretation of history traditions, and self-image’.  
   The vast majority of strategic culture scholars have limited their analyses of the impact of strategic culture to explain how one country’s own strategic culture influences its security policy behaviour. In doing so, however, they have only grasped half the picture and missed the strategic cultural image that a country’s political and military elite hold of a particular or potential adversary. Leaders’ perceptions of another country’s capabilities, activities, and intentions are filtered through how these elites conceive of the other country’s strategic culture. This writer has conducted preliminary research on China’s ‘second face’ focused upon dealings with the United States, Japan, and India.  
The First Face: Self-Perception versus Reality 
Chinese leaders overwhelmingly tend to view their own strategic tradition as one consistent with what I have described above as the ‘Great Wall’ strand of strategic culture. But this perception is at odds with the reality of a ‘Cult of Defence’ that guides Beijing to act offensively and use military force vigorously, all the while rationalizing it as defensive and reluctant acts. 
   Thus, the mantra of ‘peaceful rise’ or ‘peaceful development’ is not superficial propaganda but reflects the fervent beliefs of those articulating it. The logic of some leaders is that China is fundamentally different to other rising powers and history will not repeat itself. Arguably, the most important strategic principle of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is ‘active defence’. According to Chinese strategists, this doctrinal concept in many ways encapsulates the traditional Chinese penchant for only fighting in self-defence, and so on. But a more careful analysis reveals that the concept is highly elastic and encompasses all manner of military actions, including pre-emptive strikes. According to a researcher at the PLA’s Academy of Military Sciences (AMS), writing in 1995, ‘Our strategic principle of'”striking only after the enemy has struck'' certainly does not exclude sudden “first strikes” in campaign battles or counterattacks in self-defense into enemy territory’. Indeed, one thoughtful analyst of Chinese strategy contends: ‘Active defense strategy does not acknowledge the difference ... between defense and offense’. The fact is that China labels every use of military force since 1949 as a ‘self-defence counter attack’. These include the Korean War (1950– 1953), the brief Himalayan border war with India (1962), the clashes with the Soviet Union (1969), and the land attack against Vietnam (1979).  
The Second Face: Perception versus Reality 
Meanwhile, Chinese strategic culture tends to characterize other states as more disposed to use force than China and more focused on aggressive and nefarious intentions, especially in relation to China. This is especially relevant with regards to the United States and Japan. Chinese elites tend to view the United States as epitomizing a ‘Western’ strategic culture that contrasts starkly with an ‘Eastern’ strategic culture, best exemplified by China. The United States is typically characterized as possessing a warlike and offensive-minded military disposition that is part of a broader expansionist, maritime, and materialist strategic culture. And Chinese tend to define their own strategic culture as the antithesis of the United States. In addition to being pacifistic and defensive-minded, Beijing strategists insist that China’s culture is sedentary, agrarian, and spiritual. There is also a strategic cultural tendency to frame American actions as deceptive and ‘two-faced’ on security issues. This is especially true where the issue of Taiwan is concerned (see below).  
   As for Japan, many Chinese citizens have very deeply held, negative perceptions of that country. Rather than view Japan as representing another positive variant of ‘Eastern’ strategic culture, Chinese strategists tend to see Japan in an extremely harsh and negative light. China tends to characterize Japanese actions in a historical light, emphasizing a particularly brutal picture of their behaviour. Even more contemporary studies find that China tends to perceive the Japanese as ‘arrogant’ and ‘cunning’. Moreover, emphasizing the role of the samurai and bushido (‘the way of the warrior’), Chinese analyses have depicted Japanese strategic culture as violent, ‘bloodthirsty’, and ‘barbaric’. One Chinese strategist condemned Japan for possessing a warped ‘inbred freak’ strategic culture.  
   These stereotypical views of self and other tend to generate high levels of distrust and suspicion in China’s relationships with the United States and Japan, especially in situations where the armed forces of these states are deployed or employed in the Western Pacific. For example, depictions of American and Japanese military disaster relief responses to the devastation wrought on the Philippines by Typhoon Haiyan in November 2013 were deeply coloured by these strategic cultural stereotypes. A major Chinese newspaper claimed that relief efforts by those countries in the Philippines had significant geopolitical overtones and were aimed at countering China. The account characterized Tokyo’s naval mission to the devastated island nation as Japan’s largest overseas military employment since the Second World War, again playing on the undertones of the second face of strategic culture by raising the spectre of more assertive Japanese armed forces.  
   In the 1990s and 2000s there have been serial crises in the Taiwan Strait and on the Korean peninsula. While both sets of crises have emerged because of moves by particular regional actors, specifically Taiwan and North Korea, from Beijing’s perspective major blame for both simmering hot spots escalating into crises lies with the United States. This allocation of blame is not just linked to the continued American security relationship with Taiwan, the enduring American alliance with South Korea, and the presence of American forward deployed forces in Northeast Asia. And this blame is not simply about the history of American warfighting on the Korean peninsula and brinkmanship in the Taiwan Strait. The blame Beijing directs towards Washington also flows from the two faces of strategic culture, namely the juxtaposition of the Chinese perception that the United States has a belligerent and expansionist strategic culture with the self-perception of China possessing a peaceful and defensive-minded strategic culture. Of course, American current policy, actions, existing security arrangements, and the historical record are all highly relevant but these are made coherent and orderly to Beijing when they are combined to form a compelling strategic cultural narrative. 
   On Taiwan, so the narrative goes, China has adopted a sincere and consistent policy of peaceful unification for the past four decades and has pledged to only use military force as the last resort. From Beijing’s perspective this is a remarkably restrained and eminently reasonable approach, especially given the centrality of national unification as a core national interest. Indeed, one of the most prominent interpreters of China’s strategic culture insists that national unification is a key element. China’s ‘seeking unification ... [is] the soul of ... Chinese military strategy endowed by ... Chinese civilization’.  
   In contrast to Beijing’s principled stance, Washington is viewed as offensive minded, two-faced, and double-dealing on the issue of Taiwan – something that was supposed to have been resolved four decades ago. From Beijing’s perspective, the issue of Taiwan was first thought to have been settled in discussions between Mao Zedong and Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger in the early 1970s. Beijing next thought it had been resolved in the late 1970s during negotiations over normalization of relations between Deng Xiaoping and interlocutors from the Carter administration. Then, hoping the third time was a charm, Beijing believed that the Reagan administration had at last truly committed the United States to ending arms sales to Taiwan for good with the signing of the 17 August 1982 Communique. In retrospect, Beijing reconfirms its own assumptions by drawing the conclusion that Washington was never negotiating sincerely in the first place. 
   Although all has been quiet in the Taiwan Strait since the March 2008 election of Kuomintang candidate Ma Ying-jeou, widely seen in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as a moderate pro-China figure, there has been much talk of an increasingly assertive China in other areas and on other issues. Beijing’s attention has turned to being more forceful and vocal on its territorial claims in the South China and East China Seas. Tensions have simmered in the South China Sea, especially between China and Vietnam and China and the Philippines, the latter notably manifest in 2012 over the Scarborough Reef. Tensions have also recently risen in the East China Sea between China and Japan and China and the United States over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. These tensions are a combination of a long-standing territorial dispute, rising nationalism, and Chinese perceptions of burgeoning Japanese militarism aided and abetted by a belligerent American patron. The result is an incendiary situation with considerable potential for escalation. 
   In September 2010 Japan seized an intoxicated Chinese fishing boat skipper who rammed two Japanese coast guard vessels near the disputed islands and prepared to put him on trial. Chinese outrage prompted Japan to scuttle the effort and repatriate him. In September 2012 the Japanese government decided to purchase three of the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands to pre-empt the efforts of a wealthy ultranationalist citizen to buy the islands. China again made its displeasure known, and subsequently increased its coast guard and sometimes navy presence in the vicinity of the islands. Then, in November 2013, the PRC’s Ministry of National Defense declared the establishment of an expansive Air Defense Identification Zone in the East China Sea that included the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. China insisted that all civilian and military aircraft file flight plans with Beijing, and this triggered another round of tensions with Washington and Tokyo. 
   While many observers thought they were witnessing a more hawkish and recalcitrant China, from the perspective of Beijing and many Chinese analysts the country was only reacting defensively to American assertiveness and efforts to stir up trouble in China’s sphere of influence. Beijing interpreted Secretary of State Hillary Clin ton’s remarks at the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) summit in Hanoi in July 2010 as unwarranted interference in China’s backyard. Beijing blamed Washington for orchestrating opposition among Southeast Asians to China. The articulation of the ‘Air Sea Battle’ strategic concept appeared to aim squarely at re-posturing the American military to fight China, and the Obama administration’s announcement of a ‘rebalance’ or ‘pivot’ to the Asia-Pacific only reconfirmed Beijing’s view of the clash of American and Chinese strategic cultures. Tensions between China and Japan over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands were also interpreted by many in China as the United States making more mischief in Beijing’s neighborhood – or at least declining to rein in Tokyo – and taking Japan’s side in terms of who owns the islands. Officially, of course, the United States takes no position on the islands’ ownership but Washington is on record as saying the American – Japanese alliance does cover the Senkakus. 
An Emerging Pan-Asian Identity? 
As noted in the introductory article, lessons from the European Union may inform efforts to develop regional cooperation in the Asia-Pacific. The People’s Republic of China (PRC) seeks to promote a collective ‘Eastern way’ or ‘Asian way’ of statecraft in contrast to a ‘Western way’ to appeal to other Asians and counter American and European influence. However, this initiative has had mixed results for several reasons. First, although Beijing has had periods of good and cooperative relations with most of its neighbors, these have alternated with more tense and even hostile episodes, especially where unresolved territorial disputes are concerned. Second, a number of Chinese strategists and scholars have tended to highlight what they believe are significant differences between Chinese strategic culture and that of some other Asian countries, notably Japan and India. Indeed, the potential for cooperation is inextricably tied to differences in the first and second faces of strategic cultures in the region. China seeks to promote an Asian way that is heavily influenced by its own external face of strategic culture while others in the region have very different remembrances of the same past. 
   Continued political and military tensions across the Taiwan Strait and on the Korean peninsula also inhibit the emergence of a broader Asian strategic culture identity. Relations between China and Taiwan have been remarkably collegial since early 2008 when Kuomintang (KMT) candidate Ma Ying-jeou was elected president of the island (he was re-elected to another four-year term in 2012). But tensions may return, especially if a candidate from the so-called ‘Pan Green’ opposition coalition is favoured to win or wins, because Beijing views most candidates from political parties other than the KMT as being anti-China and pro-independence. Taiwan Strait crises since the mid 1990s have tended to correlate with four-year election cycles on the island. 
   While the Taiwan Strait has been remarkably calm in recent years, the Korean peninsula has been quite volatile as North Korea has continued to pursue a nuclear weapons programme (with nuclear tests in October 2006, May 2009, and February 2012), despite widespread condemnation, and engage in periodic provocations towards its regional neighbours. These have included ballistic missile launches in July 2006, July 2009, April 2012, and May 2013, conventional artillery salvos in 2010, as well as the torpedoing of a South Korean naval vessel in 2010. While Pyongyang has proved to be a major and chronic headache for Beijing (and there is much Chinese frustration focused on North Korea), most of the blame for tensions on the peninsula tends to be directed at Washington. The Chinese narrative is that the North Korean problem is caused or at least significantly exacerbated by the hostile policy of the United States. If only Washington would adopt a more conciliatory approach to Pyongyang, this might make all the difference. According to a number of Chinese analysts, a key reason why North Korea has not embraced a Korean variant of China post-Mao economic reform and opening policy is the harsh and threatening stance of the United States. These analysts stress that Washing ton’s willingness in 1979 to normalize diplomatic relations with Beijing was a necessary precondition for China to adopt systemic economic reforms, expand overseas trade ties, and open up to foreign investment.  
   The chronic Korea flashpoint contributes to multiple security dilemmas in Northeast Asia. Tokyo, Seoul, and Washington all feel threatened by Pyongyang and each reacts by enhancing its military capabilities. North Korea’s ballistic missile threat, for example, alarms Japan and provides an impetus for missile defence and other military modernization efforts. Tokyo’s efforts are perceived by Beijing as threatening to China and are interpreted as indicators of a militaristic Japanese strategic culture. 
   The closest that the continent has to a shared sense of identity today is through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), though it may fall well short of a regional strategic cultural orientation. While ASEAN is sometimes derided as ineffective and scornfully referred to as a ‘talk shop’, the regional organization has been remarkably successful in building a Southeast Asian identity and creating a spirit of cooperation among ten diverse countries many of which have had contentious relations and sometimes violent conflicts with each other. As a result, Southeast Asians speak proudly of an ‘ASEAN way’ that emphasizes dialogue and consensus. And ASEAN has spawned a host of affiliate alpha-numeric multilateral fora, including the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN+3 (ASEAN members plus China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea), and ASEAN+6 (adding China, Japan, Korea, India, Australia, and New Zealand). No comparable level of coordination has been achieved elsewhere in Asia, although nascent progress is being made in South Asia via the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and in Central Asia via the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). Northeast Asia is arguably least receptive to a common regional identity. While multilateralism is under-institutionalized all across Asia, it is perhaps most under-developed in North east Asia. Ultimately, this may hinge on the willingness of great powers to commit fully to the enterprise. And this remains open to interpretation. In the opinion of one prominent Chinese analyst at the CCP’s leading think-tank, the Central Party School, the leaders of China, Japan, and South Korea tend to ‘think nationally, talk regionally, and yet always act bilaterally’.  
Conclusion 
In sum, this article shows that China possesses a Great Wall of the imagination, and its impact is very real. The genesis of the Great Wall is shrouded in the myth of the founding of the first unified Chinese state and inseparable from the idea of a monistic Chinese strategic culture – pacifist, defensive-minded, and non-expansionist. This myth is enormously potent, producing a compelling narrative, and the result is a Cult of Defence whereby Chinese tend to perceive their own country’s military activities as always being defensive and non-threatening to others – the ‘first face of strategic culture’. Moreover, China tends to view other states, notably the United States and Japan, as belligerent and threatening because they are believed to possess violent and aggressive strategic cultures – the ‘second face of strategic culture’. The upshot is a very real Chinese inability to recognize the existence of security dilemma spirals and hence an increased likelihood of tensions and crises that could escalate into military conflict.  
   The principal purveyors of China’s strategic culture narrative today are political and military elites and scholars. But the narrative resonates powerfully with the ordinary people of China who also serve as keepers in the era of a rising new Central Kingdom. In many ways the nation seems to have rediscovered the glories of its past and a rich cultural tradition widely viewed as peace-loving and defensive minded. This strategic culture is contrasted with those possessed by key perceived rivals such as the United States and Japan, both of which continue to be portrayed as violent and aggressive with hostile intentions towards China. In sum, the Great Wall may be a figment of the Chinese imagination but this mythical fortification has real impact as a powerful strategic culture narrative that shapes China’s interactions with other countries in the Asia-Pacific region in the 21st century. 

